what we saying it's not that
embarrassing yes good like sometimes
when I get nervous my I will start
watering like I don't think that's odd
again that's probably pretty normal I
mean your system's fired up and you know
your eyes are probably trying to clear
themselves right maybe you know I mean
I'm just speculating maybe here maybe
people will message me after this this
podcast and you're like that happens to
me too and I'll feel better like I'm
sure it doesn't sound that odd that's
not certainly not embarrassing so I
don't know why embarrassed by eyes
watering if you're nervous okay thanks
for being here I really appreciate it I
am super at always happy to come well
we've been talking and we've been
talking about immune systems and this is
one of the main things that I wanted to
talk to you about like what are this
trick is this all we're hearing is
shelter in place where I'm asked don't
touch anybody don't go outside we're not
hearing what can you do to strengthen
your immune system and I think that as a
public health a public service you know
a health thing this is one of the most
important things that I think you can
really focus and concentrate on and an
actual thing that you could be proactive
about during this weird time yeah well
definitely I think focusing on on you
know lifestyle factors that you can you
know possibly modulate your immune
system and strengthen it is important
what's interesting is that the immune
system is you know after doing just so
much of course the past like couple of
months I've been nothing but like
reading about the immune system and
trying to understand of course this new
virus Irish cough too but I've just
learned so much you know over the past
couple of months
I'm not an immunologist I'm not an
infectious disease expert so you know
while I've had some training in
immunology I definitely you know didn't
know don't know everything there is to
know but what just you know doing some
some reading about like why are people's
immune systems so different like that's
that's the big thing like when you take
like a young population as you get older
your immune system does decline I mean
there's lots of changes that occur but
like in general like people have
different immunes
and what's interesting is that there's
been tons of like genetic studies done
on like you know identical twins and
they're followed over time and what's
found is that genetics is not the major
regulator of immune function it's
something in the environment and what
this is what surprised me and and it's
not totally it going to answer your
question but I will we can totally get
to that but the main one of the main
things besides age that regulates immune
system is like previous exposure to
viruses like so I thought that was
really interesting and in particular one
one virus the asite o matic megalo virus
CMV did you know like between 50 to 80
percent of the u.s. population has it
like at least by the time they're like
an adult has it permanently or it's a
it's a herpes virus so it's a lifelong
thing and this is why it basically so it
changes your immune system what are the
symptoms of it most people that are
healthy don't ever know they have it
because there's no symptoms whoa yeah
unless you're immunocompromised but most
people that are healthy they don't know
you know that they're infected with it
what's it again what is it
cytomegalovirus its CMV sounds like
something Godzilla fights there it is so
when so interest but here's the
interesting thing about this virus is
that it so this is one of the major
things multiple studies have been
looking at like you know just immune
variability and it's like CMV has been
identified in multiple studies and the
thing that the reason it got me
interested because I was like 80 almost
80 percent I mean I could have it right
right totally have it and it changes the
immune function it's totally different
between young and old so so when you're
younger and if you have it it actually
enhances immune function so they've done
studies where like they they they have
given people influenza vaccine and
oftentimes these vaccine studies are
used to kind of test the immune response
and like how you're how robust your
immune response is because you're you're
given a vaccine and there's all
different types of vaccines you know
pieces of an antigen or all the
different types of you know ways that
you can you can expose someone to a
bacteria or virus but you have a
response to it and the response is a you
know involves your adaptive immunity you
making what's called neutralizing
antibodies that you know basically
eventually
to the virus and neutralize it prevent
it proponent from entering the cell so
people without have CMV their young have
a really robust response to the vaccine
much better but older people have the
complete opposite where it's like you
know delete arias and the reason for
that scientists think is because
basically this virus it's it's stuck
with you life long and and it kind of
reactivates every few years and like
every time it reactivates it kind of
trains your t-cells you know which are
part of your immune system to become
focused on that CMV and so as you get
older your your t-cell population
becomes more focused on fighting that
virus and less so on other viruses that
you're exposed to
but this virus doesn't have any symptoms
most healthy people don't have any
symptoms with it I know it's really like
it's really weird so what I'm wondering
and the reason I'm even like going here
it and it has nothing to do with you
know taking vitamin C or zinc and we can
talk about all that stuff and vitamin D
but I just thought it was so damn
interesting because we hear all these
stories in the news where you know some
people are asymptomatic some people are
you know then some people are just
really getting you know hard-hit and and
these people let's say they're more
age-matched right we know that elderly
people are more prone to a severe form
but it just made me think what if this
you know previous previous viral
exposure to something like CMV is is
kind of like also kind of shaping
people's immune responses in some way
surely people are gonna be looking
looking at that but I just thought that
was a really interesting thing to come
across you know and then the other sort
of on the same on the same law along the
same lines as previous you know previous
virus exposure is like something that
really seems to be something that is a
main regulator of how people like what
how your immune you know what your
immune response is you know and so so
you mean by how many times you've caught
the flu how many times you've had
whether you hang on to it how you
respond to it you know yeah I mean like
you if you get the flu is it gonna not
is it like a three-day kind of thing or
is it gonna knock you out for two weeks
kind of thing that's what I mean right
so I mean if you if you get a sample
like there's been these
Syrio surveys where they basically that
just means they both don't get a sample
of plasma and look for different
antibodies viral antibodies and they'll
find at any given points a person has
like antibodies against ten different
viruses just randomly you know so you're
constantly being exposed to viruses you
don't you're not always
you just don't succumb to them right
you're not always getting sick and so um
you know like another really interesting
kind of thing is like you know there's
so the Sarge Cove - virus it's part of a
family of corona viruses called the beta
corona viruses so Stars Cove one the
virus that was responsible for the
original SARS outbreak in 2002 or
something the mayor's one in the Middle
East and then there's two different ones
that are responsible for the common cold
now corona viruses are only responsible
between like 15 to 30 percent of common
cold cases so it's not like the common
cold is the illness you get but there's
lots of different viruses that can cause
it but what's interesting is that
there's been studies showing that these
two beta corona viruses that are
responsible for some of the common cold
cross-react with so there's one that
cross reacts with the SARS cove one
which has it varies it's very the
sequence is very homologous to harsh co2
virus and it's also been showed that the
Stars Cove wanted antibodies against the
Stars code one can neutralize the common
cold one so there's like cross immunity
happening between these other viruses
right and so there's been some studies
by the CDC on Sarge Cove to where they
found basically that people that are
infected with SARS cough to also boost
their antibodies against the the common
cold one so you know there's there
certainly I think a good hypothesis to
be made that potentially you know one or
two of these common cold viruses could
the antibodies you make against them
could also somehow maybe maybe you know
interact with the sashko to by risk
potentially neutralize it I mean that's
a big open question that seems possible
without we don't have any answer to that
I think we will like there's large
there's large-scale cereal surveys being
done I know at least three that I think
his name is dr. Michael Bush she's at
UCSF he's like he's doing like really
large surveys where they're there
they're going to be analyzing Sarah from
people from like you know blood donors
and stuff and like following them over
the course of several years to see you
know just basically understand more so
now what is the speculation if there's
any sort of uniform speculation as to
why when you hear about prisons where a
lot of these prisoners I don't know if
you've seen that there's a video going
around where one prisoner had saw Sora's
Cove 2 Co vid 19 whatever and spitting
into a cup and then passing it around to
all these other inmates so they could
all get it so that they get released
so these because they're releasing
people especially California which is so
wacky they're releasing sex offenders
and there's been some really
high-profile releases of these horrible
people that should be in jail probably
forever and they're releasing them it's
like it it's really disturbing but what
would cause other than something like
that what would cause all these
prisoners to not just be positive that
makes sense but to all be asymptomatic
is there any speculation as to why large
these large groups there was another one
that was a meatpacking plant where most
of the people were asymptomatic as well
I wasn't I wasn't aware of the
meatpacking one being asymptomatic but
the I did read about the one in prison
and it was like blowing my mind like
what a person like what's going on like
that's insane it's kind of like you read
these stories so so this is like there's
one thing that it's important to keep in
mind when we say asymptomatic like you
know there's asymptomatic in like a
person that never actually gets symptoms
right and then there's asymptomatic so
there was a study done at the CDC I
don't know a month ago maybe a little
more where they they measured like they
did it they did this nasal pharyngeal
swab test in a nursing home 70 something
people and 13 of them tested
asymptomatic like they had no symptoms
but they tested positive but then they
went back a week later and ten of those
people had symptoms than three
asymptomatic so unless like there's
another like if you test someone and
they're asymptomatic at that time
testing they could be pre-symptomatic
right in other words like you have to go
back a week later hmm and see if they
have symptoms right because that that's
really important so so let's say even
you know you know 60% were asymptomatic
like I don't know if they went back and
tested a week later if it was just like
a single time but that's what that's
what this is what got me thinking about
this whole thing was you know in in the
prisons and jails I mean they're in
close quarters and they're you got one
virus that someone's exposed to you and
they all get it right so like what if
there's I don't know the CMV you know
percentage there but what if the corona
viruses are going around there what if
what if you know some some common cold
corona virus has gone around and that
you know those antibodies that they've
made to neutralize that corner beta
corona virus are somehow helping with
the Sarge Cove too like I would love to
see that tested do you know they
immunize people did vaccinate people
when they go into jail I was trying to
figure that out as well because like the
tuberculosis about tuberculosis one of
the types of vaccines they do for TB I
think they do it in like Japan and some
other countries where they've got a
really low death rate and so they're
kind of that's a test that's a clinical
trial that's now going on where they're
trying to test but I was trying to
figure out is there a vaccination I
would imagine it would be simple for
them to do that you're entering into
prison they just vaccinate you just I
couldn't come to an answer I was I was
searching for that the other now trying
to figure that out but I think that's
also a really good I mean there's a ton
of theories right right I mean it's just
you could go on and on and on but the
whole the thing that I just think that I
would like to see more research and I'm
just hoping you know that that CDC and
other people are investigating these
these other the cross and unity right
like if there's if there's antibodies
that you're making against another
coronavirus beta corona virus is in the
same family as this sarge one no one's
had sarge one in the united states you
know so like that one doesn't that
that's not as relevant as but the common
cold you know that's that's very common
right so you know if if fifteen to
thirty percent of the common cold is
composed of corona viruses we know at
least two of those corona virus sir are
in the same family that have been
identified to make at least in one case
there's
neutralizing antibodies so their husband
cross immunity then you'd think why why
not test that that cuz get some animal
studies started on that you know peaking
of animal studies there was an article
that I was reading yesterday that was
saying that they're they're hoping that
they've found some antibodies in llamas
that they're hoping they're going to be
able to because of see we could find
this because of these antibodies in
llamas they they they're hoping they can
either transfer them to people or learn
something about how these antibodies are
created but llamas seem to be a meat
here it is llamas could be the key to
fighting new coronaviruses research says
make that larger it says it may sound
bizarre animals but llamas could be the
key to fighting new coronavirus
researchers from Belgium oh my remember
that's the big lady that I was showing
you earlier
she's a healthful eating and the United
States published an article this week in
the journal Cell that highlights the
potential use of llama antibodies to
prevent kovat 19 infections antibodies
from a four year old Belgian llama named
winter show promise in blocking corona
virus from infecting cells according to
research from the University of Texas
Austin the National Institutes of Health
and the Ghent I said that Kent gh ent
University studying earlier forms of the
corona viruses researchers have found an
antibody in winter that effectively
attached itself and neutralized spiked
protein in Tsar's Cove one and MERS Cove
researchers believe the particularly
antibody which has been found in other
llamas as well can be injected into an
uninfected individual to protect them
from getting infected with the new
chrono avenues for you know therapeutics
and I you know in addition to like
repurposing drugs monoclonal antibodies
you know being able to basically
identify antibodies that do neutralize
Tsarskoe to virus whether they come from
llamas or humans and you know and
basically identify the specific antibody
that can bind to that spike protein that
you just mentioned which is that region
it's known that the antibody is bind
there neutralize it it's also the region
that that is used to get inside of
CEL so monoclonal antibodies I think are
a really big you know possibility for a
promising therapeutic because you can
then I mean the problem is growing like
large-scale manufacturing them right so
like if you can identify these
antibodies and then manufacture them you
can inject them in people and then
potentially get some protection the
problem is is that that's not it like
it's just going to be a short-lived
protection like it's going to be it's
not like you can it's not like a vaccine
or your body's making its own antibodies
and they're and they're more
longer-lived
oh no but so in areas where people are
getting exposed perhaps you could give
it to them it would stop them from
getting but how long we say short-lived
we well we don't know I mean how so it's
you know it's probably enough to like if
you're a healthcare worker your first
line you know help you know first
responder people that are definitely
like being exposed to large doses of the
virus that that could be a promising
area but also I think even just treating
patients like that have already been
infected you know so that's that's also
another so like in combination with some
of this other stuff like from des abeer
which is you know it's not like a silver
bullet but it seems like it's also
prominent
combination of other other factors as
well but yeah the monoclonal antibodies
is a really I know there's like
Regeneron is a big company they're
they're they're growing some large-scale
ones I think there's I they isolated
from humanized mice or something but
there's other companies that have
isolated them from humans that have been
affected so you know that's that's
definitely a promising area for sure and
the good thing about that is that have
you heard of antibody dependent
enhancement do you know so that's a big
concern all right so so basically when
you when your body is exposed to a
pathogen like a virus your your innate
immune system you know the first line of
defense like neutrophils things like
that are making hydrogen peroxide trying
to kill the virus but then in the
background your adaptive immune system
and I'm just totally generalizing it's
you know is is also working in the
background and you know part of that an
adaptive immune response is
you know to produce antibodies so you
have memory B cells that are making
antibodies that are specific to bind
different regions epitopes on the virus
and neutralize them prevent them from
getting inside of the cell and so that
adaptive immune system usually takes
about seven days after you're exposed to
the virus right
the problem is antibody dependent
enhancement so sometimes a neutralizing
antibody is an antibody that can bind to
the virus and neutralize it stop it from
entering yourself right so you're it's
doing its job but you sometimes make
antibodies that are non neutralizing or
don't do as good of a job they don't
bind as tight or something and then you
can have what's called antibody
dependent enhancement and this was like
a big problem for the RSV vaccine back
in the you know like most kids get RSV
it's a respiratory tract infection the
most kids get it by the time they're two
like and there's no vaccine that that
are that's given back in the sixties
there was this antibody dependent
enhancement happened in some clinical
studies with toddlers and some fathers
got really really sick and a couple died
but what happens is basically the
antibody binds so that there's a couple
of things the antibody binds to the
virus and can basically change its
conformation and allow the virus to get
into the cell better so then you become
like you know you get like a higher
viral load and then you don't have
antibodies to neutralize it and it just
you know it could be more it could be it
could lead to death the other thing that
happens is the antibody binds the virus
doesn't neutralize it but it like makes
this crazy immune complex that like
activates your immune system to just go
haywire and it causes all sorts of
pathology and that's what happened with
the RSV toddlers so there's a few
viruses that this happens with an
unfortunately corona virus is one like
this has been identified with the SARS
code one virus and I think marriage as
well where so this is also a problem
with vaccines so like people like giving
giving the vaccine people's immune
response some people can have that
antibody dependent hansman and that's
what was shown to happen with these with
this article one there was some
non-human primate studies that that did
that and also animal studies as well so
you know menthe
the thing with monoclonal antibodies is
they're a little more specific because
you know they neutralize and you're like
growing them up like you've done all
that test as opposed to just letting
your immune system do its thing and then
potentially you know you may have this
like non neutralizing antibody that
could cause problems but that's kind of
the concern and I know that the vaccine
people that are working in vaccines are
working on them it's like they're
concerned I mean about that and
completely trying to like figure that
all out it's such a strange virus it
almost seems like there's multiple
viruses there are yeah so I mean there's
and it's funny that because it's kind of
connected to this antibody dependent
enhancement there's there's been quite a
few different like forms like mutations
that have been identified but too
particular in that spike protein region
that's like an important region because
antibodies bind there and because that's
the region like that you know the virus
uses to get into the cell and so there's
been there's been two major like strains
that have been identified and one of
them so it's in a spinning spike region
and it's a aspartate to glide glycine
mutation and basically in in asia and
china the the predominant form is the
the aspartate the like original
quote-unquote form and then in Europe
and also in North America this other
this other form the glycine mutant is
prominent and there's been studies that
have shown looking at like okay looking
in parts of Europe different countries
in Europe that have this predominant
form that they're basically there's a
higher mortality rate but they didn't
actually measure infected patients so
you know it's kind of like correlation
but what's interesting is that there's
there's actually been a genetic link to
this meet this mutant so there's studies
there's been some large-scale genetics
genetic studies that have found that
Asians about 20% of Asians have
basically a nucleotide change in a gene
that encodes for a protein that's
involved in this you know basically in
allowing this virus to get into the cell
but that basically prevents them from
having this mutant that's predominant in
Europe and also in New York and in North
America in general that's a shame
because my friend Michael who got it is
mom who got it who's in her 70s is Asian
and that is she kicked it in a day that
is interesting so there's something so
they're there wonder if she has that
snip so we we wear our genetic report
that we have like we've got one that's
like a new viral report it's a free one
where we're kind of like putting some of
these interesting snips which don't mean
anything I mean like you know it's just
information that you know is interesting
there's a lot of researchers out there
trying to like figure out if genetics is
involved in this but the thing that's so
interesting about that mutation is that
the it's in that spike region and it's
where the antibody binds and peep and
there's a there's like a theory going
around because that specific region it's
been shown in SARS Cove one to cause
antibody dependent enhancement so
there's a theory that potentially that
mutation is causing people's immune
system to hyper activate and basically
become more active and it can be lead to
a morges severe Koba 19 illness that's
not been shown like it's not been shown
at all so but it's interesting right
it's interesting how in Asia and China
particularly I mean about 1% of the
population it's like less than 1% has
the other mutation meet the glycine
mutation that's in New York it's in you
know in most of the United States but
that that in less than 1% of the
population in China has that form so
weird and Japan has a very low mortality
rate correct yeah they do I know that
that that I was mentioning that TB
vaccine that's one thing that they're
investigating I mean there's all sorts
of differences in handling the whole you
know from the beginning just how you how
you handle it my resume I'd like there's
there's too many factors to like say one
thing but you know there's there's lots
of there's lots of possibilities and I
think that that I think that eventually
there's going to be therapeutics that
are identified you know you not make
multiple ones maybe and I think vitamin
D is going to potentially play a role
there but I mean just like things like
REM disappear and you know monoclonal
antibodies and then you eventually like
you know a vaccine will you know
eventually you know be be available but
I think until that till that point I do
think that things will be identified
that
just kind of help us like deal with this
like better you know what is the going
on with blood types one of the things we
talked about earlier you asked my blood
type and I said Oh positive now why is
o+ better well there's there's been some
data and this was also with identified
with SARS code one that people with type
O blood they they make antibodies they
make type a antibodies whereas people
with type A blood they make antibodies
against like they make against the B
antigen and so the type eight antibodies
were identified so there's been studies
looking at people with type O blood or
type type A blood and also type B and
type O blood there's like less less
frequency of getting Cobra 19 so as
opposed to having a severe form it's
just like you're less likely to contract
it even and it's thought because the
type a antibodies that people with type
O blood make neutralize the they
basically bind to that region that spike
region and neutralizing antibody and
prevent it from the virus from entering
the cell so that's at least that was the
mechanism that was shown with Sarge Club
one so it's thought oh well the same
we're seeing the same you know pattern
where people with Type O are protected
from Sarge Cove to possibly that's
that's also why but another really
interesting thing is that people with
type O blood
we were also talking about these like
blood clots and like I mean there's all
kinds of crazy things you read I mean
I'm reading all these publications it's
just and then the other thing is all
these publications are being uploaded on
you know before they're peer reviewed
and I mean some of them are just a mess
and it's just anyways but you know you
kind of just take it with the grain salt
where these clots are like you know
there's clots and people that are
healthy and young certainly people that
have severe cases people like older
people people that are pre-existing
conditions and stuff and the type O
blood people have lower levels of this
von Willebrand factor which basically is
involved in clotting and it's been shown
that that von Willebrand
factor also is involved like as higher
it's higher in people with carts our
cove - it was shown also be that Viserys
Cove one and it's involved with clotting
so having lower levels may somehow even
help protect against that's a theory it
hasn't been shown but what is known is
that people with type O blood are less
susceptible to contracting cobra 19
that's that's definitely known but I
mean I think there's so many things
there's just there's so many factors
that a lot of data that needs to be
parsed out right for sure I mean a lot
of data that needs parse out a lot of
data that needs to be generated and and
you know we need higher quality data we
need you know you know people to repeat
stuff you mean like look what's happened
with this hydroxychloroquine stuff right
I mean I mean it's just kind of a mess
where initially it seemed like it could
be helpful and and then just more and
more studies came out where it was not
not only not helpful it was you know
toxic it was causing people to have
dangerous arrhythmias and stuff um you
know so that's that's kind of the the
reason to kind of be cautious when when
you have something new and a small and
one small study this seems like in the
beginning at least they're trying to
figure out what the correct treatment
was for these people as they were just
showing up in mass in the emergency
rooms and they didn't really know and
doctors they varied in how they
approached it my friend Michael his
doctor didn't put him on a ventilator
and he said if I put him on a ventilator
he's probably going to die right because
he said his body's gonna stop working
because it's it's gonna let the
ventilator do the breathing for him and
it's gonna give up and what he was
talking about after the fact what
Michael was talking about was how that
is proven to be correct in New York and
that some monstrous number like 80% of
the put on no leaders wound up done not
just New York I like I've had friends
that are physicians that of like you
know in New Orleans I mean the same
thing where it's like a you know I there
was someone on my team we were looking
we were doing some research on this and
I and I didn't sort of dive into the
whole thing but he was he was telling me
that
ventilators do actually like cause more
damage to the lungs and like like he'd
been reading some studies to like
confirm that and he was pretty certain
that that ventilators actually cause
damage and actually could like induce
damage where it's like making it worse
so that's so bad I don't know I don't
know all the specifics so that all I
know is that it looking at the
statistics like if you go on a
ventilator I mean surely it seems like
the outcomes not very it doesn't seem
like it's gonna be very good right now
it's hard to say is that the cause of it
or is it right you know just that
they're so fucked up by the time they
get on a ventilator they just wind up
dying right well here at like the the
there's been some really interesting
data looking at like in there so in the
Philippines and Indonesia where else
didn't or I think New Orleans as well
they've looked at patients that have
died and their vitamin D levels and been
bitten basically like in the Philippines
you know people that for like every
standard deviation increase in vitamin D
levels serum vitamin D levels
you know the people had like an 8% or
were eight fold eight times less likely
to have a severe form of Koba 19 and if
they had and they were 20 times less
likely to have critical like critic
critical form of Koba 19 whoa
in the so that was the Philippines in
the Indonesia I was a really interesting
study where like they measured vitamin D
and this was measured in the patients
there's been some vitamin D studies also
where they're like looking at you know
countries that have been affected the
worst and they all like have low vitamin
D and it's like okay well anyways that's
correlation but well so is this but a
little it's a little stronger data the
in the in Indonesia patients that died
90 i but almost 100% it was like 98
point something percent of patients that
died with Koba 19 were vitamin D
deficient four percent of patients that
died from Koba 19 were vitamin D so fish
are say four percent only four percent
were five item Indies sufficient so
basically they were all vitamin D
deficient all the ones that are dying
whoa
crazy right and New Orleans had some
crazy crazy be the mechanism that
cause so I think there's all right can
we cut can we get into vitamin C please
do it's a big I really because of you I
take 5,000 IU's a day awesome right now
I'm taking 5,000 IU's a day mm-hmm
you know 70% of the US population has
insufficient vitamin D levels which is
considered less than blood levels less
than 30 milligrams nanograms per
milliliter is something your body can
generate naturally if you're exposed to
Sun on a daily basis yes that's the best
way to get it it is but the problem is
is that we don't go outside anymore
and usually no yeah exactly
yeah now more than ever but even
terrible recipe right vitamin D
deficiency is what makes it worse and
then you're staying inside so you're not
getting any vitamin D yeah you're
becoming even more deficient you know
like like someone like 28% of the u.s.
population is actually deficient like
less than 20 nanograms from mil you know
like that's defined deficiency so
there's a lot of people in the United
States as you mentioned you make it from
the Sun so particularly UVB radiation
there's a reason why I want to talk
about this you make it from UVB
radiation exposure you know basically
you're it's made in the skin and but you
know there's certain times of the year
depending on where you live in a more
north and latitude where that UVB isn't
even hitting the atmosphere so you're
not making vitamin D also if you have
darker skin melanin protects you like
the whole you know people with darker
skin people from maybe Africa or India
or South Asia they're more equatorial
regions they're closer you know closer
to the equator and there's more UVB
radiation throughout the year and so as
a protective mechanism to not get burned
you have melanin which protects you
right the problem is is that melanin
also blocks your your ability to produce
vitamin D but if you're out in the Sun
all the time you know in a place where
you're getting UVB radiation it's not a
problem well this is the very reason why
people in places like Scotland and
England have such pale skin exactly
cloudy all the time so your body sort of
develops its own ability to absorb more
vitamin exactly so what happens when you
take some what what happens when you
take a person from from
South Asia from India from Africa and
you put them in Sweden or in Minnesota
or in the UK a place where UVB radiation
doesn't hit most of the year and you
don't give them a supplement what
happens is they become severely vitamin
D deficient severely and what happens
when you take I mean I mean you can
throw this on the you can flip flip this
over and say okay what happens when you
take the guy from the UK the Brit and
put them in Australia like without any
sunscreen or without a hat or they're
gonna yeah so I mean do you think that
this could be a factor and why so many
African Americans are getting hit so
hard so here's the thing so African
Americans are there's lots of all right
African Americans are in the UN United
States there's been studies African
Americans are severely deficient they're
28 times more deficient in vitamin D
than than Caucasians Wow yeah and it's
it's it's because it's because they have
darker skin and you know if they're not
getting enough Sun they're not getting
enough Sun because people stay inside
more people stay inside you know it's
not it's not like the old days when we
were out hunter-gatherer and out in the
Sun all the time we're in our lab we're
inside all the time we're in school were
at work in her office in her cubicle so
the CDC you know obviously there's been
studies showing that african-americans
are more hit but they didn't really
correct for tons of like other factors
because socioeconomic status is
important how other health factors you
know and but there was a big study just
released not long ago from from like the
National Office of Statistics in Britain
or something like that I don't know what
their official name was but they
released some statistics from England
and Wales and the I don't know what the
correct name to say I mean that the
blacks they're basically living in
England and in Wales are four times more
likely to die of copn 19 than than
whites when they when they adjusted all
that data for socioeconomic status and
for other health factors there were two
times more likely to die so clearly
socioeconomic status and other health
factors are playing a role but there's
something else unidentified and I think
it's vitamin D I think that you know so
you know the vitamin D like it hasn't
look vitamin I'm not saying that vitamin
D is going
prevent you from getting Coppa 19 or
it's a treatment although I am involved
in a clinical study where we're gonna be
testing a very small open arm study we
can talk about but you know I'm not a
physician a medical doctor
I've never intubated anyone so don't
think I'm saying that I don't want
people to think I'm saying it's a
treatment I just want to it's a
hypothesis that needs to be tested and
thankfully there are clinical trials
randomized control trials that are now
ongoing and there's some that are
recruiting but just the statistics it
you've already listed about vitamin D
and the people that have had kovat 19
those are insane it's insane and also in
Sweden there's a huge population of
Somalis that have migrated to Sweden and
they have been identified as being
severely vitamin D deficient because a
lot of the Somalis have off they're also
like autism rates are really high there
and there's this link between I
published a link also between vitamin D
and autism but so there's been studies
looking at vitamin D levels in the
Somali population I mean they are so
deficient because you're taking again
you're taking someone who's supposed to
be who's you know evolved to be getting
a lot of Sun but not burn from it and
then and then putting them in a place
where they they can't get any vitamin D
from the Sun and if they don't get a
supplement like they're gonna be
deficient you know and there's so much
more likely there like it's it's
wreaking havoc in Sweden on the Somali
population it is so logical yeah it's
it's it's and then okay so elderly
elderly are like insanely more deficient
I forgot the exact number obese also the
obese people are like three times more
likely to be vitamin deficient in the
United States why is that because
vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin and
it's less it's been shown to be 50% less
bioavailable so you have to really make
it in your skin it's stored in fat and
you know it's released and when you know
basically into the bloodstream and then
it can gets converted into a hormone
this hormone regulates 5% more than 5%
of the human protein encoded human
genome it's a lot of G that's a height
to hormone like can you imagine just
walking around without testosterone
you're a man that's a hormone I mean
like because there's a lot of people
that are deficient in vitamin D and this
it's a steroid hormone it gets converted
into a hormone the
this isn't just a vitamin you know it's
important it's really important so I
went off on a tangent but anyways what
can I ask you this boy we're off in this
tangent what is when you what is
happening to people when they are
vitamin D like what's happening in the
vitamin D deficient what is happening in
the body that's causing their immune
system this this hormone deficiency not
having this vitamin D whether it's
through some exposure so there's lots of
things I mean it plays a vital into your
receptors on like your immune cells and
and the reason for that is because one
of the hormone vitamin D hormone binds
to the receptor it activates all these
genes and that the genes do stuff that
are you know regulate immune function
you know there's there studies that have
shown people and I love these studies
because because they basically take away
the people's complaints about you know
there's lots of epidemiological studies
showing that low vitamin D is associated
with disease XY or Z and everyone's like
well you know they're out in this
they're not in the Sun as much so
they're not as healthy they're not as
physically active or not whatever even
though those confounding factors are
usually corrected for it sold at the end
of day it's an association right and
everyone's like correlations on
causation which is true but sometimes
you got to like look at the full body of
data you know there are genetic
polymorphisms so so there are people
that have variations in genes that cause
them to genetically have lower vitamin D
and so this this is called Mendelian
randomization when you can take a person
that's that has a genetically like it's
they're genetically low vitamin D so
you're not categorizing them based on
their vitamin D levels
you're categorizing them based on their
gene and those people are more likely to
die from respiratory infections just
based on that gene alone so yeah at that
gene that it's known to lower it lowers
vitam it leads to lower vitamin D levels
and so like those people are more likely
to die from respiratory infections than
people that don't have that which it's a
great way of kind of randomizing people
by their genes as opposed to doing a
randomized control trial those have been
done as well there was a study that was
over 25 randomized control trials people
that were given a vitamin D supplement
varying doses either weekly or daily
monthly didn't work
they're the people with low baseline
vitamin D levels so people that were
like deficient they were 50% less likely
to have a respiratory tract infection if
they were taking the vitamin D
supplement over fifty percent actually
and people that had already normal
levels still had a protective effect
there was a little 10% less likely so
even people that were already considered
normal taking about vitamin D supplement
helped prevent the respiratory tract can
you take too much vitamin D yes
you can you can it's too much so right
so the the upper the tolerable upper
intake has been set by the nutrition
board the Institute of Medicine to be
4,000 IU's a day but there's been
studies that have shown that you can I
mean people that have taken you know
10,000 IU's a day for for multiple years
haven't had any hypercalcemia or had you
know problems but too much vitamin D can
be toxic it's not good to take that it's
best to like get a vitamin D blood test
and I think that personally there has
been a trend so people that have blood
levels higher than 60 may have just a
little bit higher calcium level but not
much not like it's not like anything to
be hugely concerned about but there are
studies also showing that either vitamin
k1 so there's been a meta-analysis
looking at of 12 different studies or
think where vitamin k1 or vitamin k2
were given and both of those improved
bone mineral density and prevented any
hypercalcemia because when you take
vitamin D you absorb calcium better like
something crazy like 40% more dietary
calcium being absorbed Wow so so the
problem is is that calcium can easily
form a precipitate in in in general and
particularly when phosphorus is around
and phosphorus is another thing vitamin
D does increase the absorption of but
again like I said that you know it's
really like it's really hard to find any
studies where vitamin D is causing you
know hypercalcemia unless it's like
really really high dose for for a while
I personally think taking the the
vitamin K and what's interesting about
the vitamin k1 versus vitamin k2 with
without going into too much of a tangent
is basically the the vitamin k1 normally
it goes to your liver and it's involved
in blood coagulation but when there's
enough vitamin k1 around it stays in the
periphery and it moves calcium periphery
being blood stream it moves calcium out
of the bloodstream and takes it to
places where it's supposed to go like
the bones and the muscle vitamin k2
usually stays around the periphery that
doesn't really go to the liver so it
usually that's really what it's just
doing is you know moving calcium out and
bringing it to the bones and so I take a
I actually have k1 in my multi that I
take but I also take a k2 supplement mk4
I take it like a couple times a week
well the ke ones in my multi so I don't
bite Amin k1 is really it's found in
dark leafy greens so I get a lot of
those as well a lot so I'm getting a lot
of k1 vitamin k2 is not as it's not as
readily found in like the Western I mean
it's like the food that's highest in it
is that fermented swiping natto mm-hmm
but it's like a small quantities and
like do you ever get concerned from the
high volume of leafy greens you ever get
conservative oxalates or getting kidney
stones or anything along those lines no
I like the few studies that I've seen
it's and people that are like doing
insane juicing and they're already like
messed up you know so I'm not concerned
at all like even like the oxalate so
oxalates actually I don't want to go
into this but so ya know I don't
consider I want the vitamin D thing is
so important I mean like the the the
reason there's a big reason I think that
vitamin D is so important it's for the
lung function and the respiratory
function but what's really interesting
is that you know the the very receptor
that this Sarcos cofee virus binds to to
gain entry into the cell it's called a
stew that very receptor plays a really
important role in preventing lung damage
and and basically in preventing acute
lung injury preventing acute respiratory
distress syndrome ARDS and what's been
shown with SARS Kove one is that
kasarkode one also binds to that
receptor ace 2 it's called and that's
how it gets into the cell just like the
SARS cough - when when it binds to the
receptor it like
attachs and like through this like
weird endocytosis mechanism it takes the
receptor in and decreases the receptor
what's called down regulates down
regulates the receptor so you end up
having less ace 2 which causes like can
cause severe lung injury not having the
ACE 2 it plays a big role in protecting
that's been shown in multiple studies
like so the Sarge Cove one virus does
that it's thought the Sarge coped who
also does it because it goes through the
same entries through the same receptor
and it's been shown that like if you for
example if you give mice
lipopolysaccharide or something that's
going to cause lung injury and then you
give them vitamin D so the lung injury
itself also causes the h2 receptor to
decrease and it so it's like this
vicious cycle of like making the damage
worse but if you give my vitamin D
before that happens the h2 receptor
increases and it protects them from the
lung injury but you give the vitamin D
to control mice that don't have the lung
injury it doesn't do anything to the ACE
to receptor levels so it's not like full
stop it's not like you know drugs the
way drugs are designed is they like they
target a certain molecule and they bum
they like do their thing and they either
increase it or decrease it a lot of
times with like hormones you know
vitamins things like that there they
they maintain homeostasis you know what
I mean does like so when when shit goes
wrong they fix it they're not just like
boom full stop gonna like increase
something when everything's normal
so and that's important because there
have been some concern about taking
vitamin D increasing the ACE 2 receptor
and there's another study that was with
hypertensive rats where the hypertension
caused ace 2 to go down and that like
makes lung and it makes all sorts of
problems it also causes like kidney
problems and all sorts of things right
but but the vitamin d increased the ACE
2 but only in the hypertensive rats not
in the normal control rats again so you
know and then there was another study
that was like some other messed up
diabetic animal model where the vitamin
D actually didn't increase the ACE 2
receptor but it increased what's called
soluble ace 2 which is in like it's in
the periphery and that actually
potentially could bind Tsarskoe to virus
and prevent it from it's like
sequestering it preventing it from
entering the cell that's actually being
explored as a potential
therapeutic so but the bottom line here
is that sometimes you'll hear this h2
receptor and that's how the virus gets
in and is like I don't want that I don't
want I want less of that because that's
how the virus gets in but like like
biology is always way more complicated
than just a simple taking it out of a
big picture right you know so like the
h2 receptor the h2 is part of the rena
in angiotensin system it plays a huge
role in inflammation it's also like when
you when you decrease ace - all these
signaling cascades happen and it's like
a stew is important for producing
pro-inflammatory cytokines at the end of
the day without getting into all the
stuff you know specifics so it causes
massive inflammation to have a decrease
it basically causes acute lung injury it
exacerbates it I mean it's crazy so I
really I just I really can you imagine
if vitamin D really did help like if
there was something that could be given
along with the other stuff from desi
beer or whatever whatever it's going to
be the stuff that we identify but like
vitamin D so is so cheap it's so easy
and so many people are deficient and
insufficient you know like so yes as you
mentioned there is you know you don't
want to take too much vitamin D you
don't want to like you know overdose on
it but I think in the short term you
know particularly like in the short term
and particularly in patients people that
have already been infected you know it
may be why is to to try giving your
patient like if you're a physician you
know dealing with this may be may be
wise to try and didn't see their vitamin
D levels and perhaps give them some you
know is this being explored public means
just something that people are talking
about publicly because I all I'm hearing
is drugs and possible drug remedies
potential vaccine that they're working
on the future I'm not hearing anything
about methods nutrition that boosts your
immune system this is one of the reasons
why I really wanted to talk to you right
now
yeah let's definitely talk more there
are yes it is so there are clinical
studies unfortunately not a ton of them
in the United States that are looking
randomised control trials looking at
vitamin D the effects of vitamin D on
already you know patients with Coppa 19
which what would be great is like giving
him to like first responders or health
care workers and seeing like how does it
how does it what it what role does it
play in prevention because that's really
the easiest thing right I'm involved a
friend of mine dr. Eric Gordon he he's
put together so I kind of with his help
I've helped him design a open-armed
trial very small forty patients where
were or he is going to be giving them
fifty thousand I use every five days of
vitamin D so it's like a weekly dose
because a lot of times these people are
severely deficient and so you want to
give them a higher dose you know and and
for you know doing doing fifty thousand
I use weekly isn't you know something
that's necessarily gonna be toxic or
anything like that and then we're going
to you know we're doing some other
things vitamin C 3 grams three times a
day and then vitamin b1 we can talk
about that Simon as well but so yeah
there are I think there's like
open-label triable open-label trials are
just kind of a start it's like if you if
you see something plus we're doing like
kitchen sink right we got this this and
this and this so I think vitamin D
really is the is the star you know I
think that potentially you know I think
it really should be explored I think it
has huge potential it has to be shown
like this isn't something that people
can just you know take it home and think
I'm protected like that is not the case
we don't know that you know there's no
data showing that but I think it has
huge potential you know how would one do
a randomized control study on vitamin D
and people that have kovat 19 it seems
like well they're gonna do an addition
to they're gonna in addition to standard
of care so it's basically whatever the
standard of care is and that's that's
what we know is happening at the hundred
in hospital and in New Jersey but as you
said it seems like what's really
critical is getting into people before
they get it yeah I would love to see
that study done yeah if anyone can do
that study amazing that would be because
that would be like to me get it to
nurses get it first responders yeah I
just just get the information out there
and have nurse or nurses and first
responders take it I mean you know
vitamin D is something again like 70% of
the US population has insufficient
levels you
now that is such a crazy number it is
it's generally safe to take like like
4,000 IU's a day it is written 5 I am
but for thousands the taught the what
they they indicated as the tolerable
upper intake so why do you take five
I'm just taking 5,000 right now because
that's like I could buy the five time it
was like I didn't want to take two pills
of mm well that's me - I got one pill
it's five right well so I had my my
levels measured literally like I did
went to lot - quest quest labs like a
month before all this lockdown happened
so I got my data back pretty pretty
recent and I still hover around 50
nanograms per mil even though before I
was taking 4000 it's in generally
speaking 1000 I use will raise your
blood levels by about five nanograms per
mil and there are people with different
variations and genes that are related to
vitamin D metabolism where they have
lower levels and they need a higher dose
the only way you're going to know that
is by of course measuring your vitamin D
levels multiple times and then
potentially been doing like a genetic
analysis you know as well but you have
to measure your levels like that's the
only way to know of course right now
it's like you can't go - laughs it's
like hard to do any of that I mean but
the things that are like moronic yeah
yeah but right now when you need it but
the vitamin D I mean I'm just so like I
just I have so much I have high hopes
for it you know and maybe maybe I'm a
bit of a enthusiast with it you know I
do like I've studied vitamin D so much
I've got two publications on it I
certainly like you know you said so you
know there take that with a grain of
salt as well but I just think the data
is strong I really think the data is I
think it's mounting data and I think
that eventually something will come out
and it's going to just like the
randomized controlled trials showing
that it protects against respiratory
tract infections of course everyone
wants randomized controlled trials like
no one wants to believe anything until
it's trial I'm just I'm amazed that the
numbers of people that are deficient
it's so stunning and when you point out
the number people that are deficient
that actually wind up having severe
kovat 19 problems right yeah I know it's
stunning like some of those numbers it's
like the missing link it's like it's
right there I think that's a really good
hypothesis I do
I think it's a really good hypothesis I
want to believe it because it's easy
it's safe and I think people need
vitamin D anyways I mean yeah you know
so so of course I want to believe it you
know but like there was this interesting
study where African Americans who are
very deficient in vitamin D they were
given a vitamin D supplement for like a
month and it decreased their epigenetic
age by like two years I mean yeah so
that's a four month something like a
month I think yeah in a month they
decrease their epigenetic age by two
okay don't hold me to the month may give
me some month or two months but I think
it was a month most most people said
three months that's correct most of
these studies are about a month yeah so
yeah by 1.8 years so what it's
indicative of their suffering from this
vitamin D deficiency this alleviates
that suffering and then it puts the body
in homeostasis yeah it's changing five
percent of the human genome that's a lot
it's a lot yeah that's crazy number when
you think about it it is it's not just a
vitamin right yeah can you imagine it's
like what happens when you go into
menopause well you're not making your
estrogen I mean stuff goes wrong I mean
it's a hormone like ester estrogens a
hormone you know just hasta runs a
hormone it's a hormone you know it's
well it's it's important so you know so
that's the if you have the dr. Rhonda
Patrick pyramid of supplementation for
preventive symptoms of coma at nineteen
or preventive measures dealing with
kovat 19 that's your base number one I
take vitamin D I certainly don't know if
it's going to prevent Kover 19 I'm not
I'm hoping it does yeah it hoping it was
me saying preventative I mean like
getting your body healthy I mean my mom
I got my dad I got my whole family
everyone's on the the routine you know
the vitamin D is like the most important
so that's the foundation is vitamin D
right now yeah I mean it's it I'm always
trying to get them to have that but like
it's easier to convince when people are
scared
people are more likely to make change
when like you can't like if something
they have to be motivated to make the
change themselves they're just otherwise
it doesn't work
you know so I think that in this case
people are motivated especially people
in my parents generation that are older
because they're they're more scared
they're more scared that they could be
affected by a severe you know case of
this right so so I think that's the
certainly you know the issue yeah I
mentioned I'm drinking my vitamin C
water it's funny because I probably got
like a thousand questions about C in the
past month to month and a half or
whatever and I we kind of like my team
and I just Dobin and put together an
article released a podcast on it a video
where it were just kind of covered
everything I mean I can't believe how
many studies I read on vitamin 190
references in our article the 28 page
article on our website but vitamin C is
interesting too I mean I don't it's
certainly the the interesting thing
about vitamin C is you know they're
there there's oral and then there's
intravenous vitamin C and the
intravenous vitamin C is what's what
seems to be really relevant right now
but I think the most interesting thing
that I learned really had to do with the
the pharmacokinetics which is basically
like how much vitamin C raises your
plasma levels and like is you know is
there a saturation point where you can
eat you know 20 grams of vitamin C but
still only get to the certain point you
know and then versus what you do if you
like in your you know inject it into
your veins right intravenously so what's
interesting is that most people that are
like eating let's say that people are
just eating like five somewhere between
five to nine servings of vegetables or
fruits a day those people have anywhere
between like 70 to 80 micro mol micro
moles of vitamin C like per liter so
it's micro moles per liter
in their blood if you take like a 200
milligram supplement you only raise your
levels to like 90 so it's not much over
that like baseline most most people that
aren't eating that many that cert many
servings probably have around 50 which
is could still considered normal 50
micro moles
or micromolar and then what's
interesting is that like but those
levels you take if you take two hundred
two hundred milligrams it's that doesn't
do much if you take a gram it can raise
you up to like 130 or something if you
take three grams it can raise you to 220
and that's like the maximum level you
can get from oral supplementation 220
micromoles that's big that's a big
difference
220 versus like 50 so 3 grams 3 grams
but here's the other interesting thing
is that if you don't take it multiple
times throughout the day if you want to
get once you'll peak at around 5 hours
after I think that there's like a really
nice graph on my website and the topic
page it shows it's like you'll peak like
5 5 hours after but then you go down
steadily and over 24 hours you're back
to normal your baseline but if you take
it like you know four times a day you
can stay at 220 like well the whole time
and and the reason that's important is
because a lot of studies looking at oral
vitamin C consumption and like for
instance the common cold incidence the
common cold really depend like there's
huge variations in the results and it
all really seems to come down to dose
like it really does and when you know
the dose and how that's changing your
blood levels like if you're only taking
200 milligrams which some studies are
doing its barely doing anything over
your baseline you know so I found that
really interesting and then the
intravenous vitamin C you can you can
you can Mac I mean so far that like the
maximum I've seen measured is like
seventy times that your blood can get 70
times join reduce the I so it's like
18,000 or 17,000 or something so IVs far
more effective oh it totally overcomes
all those like saturated Bowl mechanisms
it's and it's not only more effective
it's a completely different game so what
can I pause yeah what what dose do you
recommend for intravenous vitamin C yeah
for inter Jamie can you pull up found my
fitness calm and there's a vitamin C
topic page so that way I can answer that
question better because there's I've
just pulled there's a graph if you just
like scroll to the graph there's like
and all this is on your website we
should tell everybody found my fitness
calm
vitamin C or a third page that's the
podcast but scroll back up to the to the
main home yeah so topics click on topics
there we go vitamin C somewhere bottom
there we go okay so there's a dis just
look for the figure scroll you'll see it
okay right there it goes
is there any way you can make that yeah
the bottom one is one I wanna see that's
the intravenous okay so there we go so
this is intravenous dose so you could I
you want to get at least 10 grams so you
can see 10 grams is like and 10 grams is
ten thousand milligrams yeah 10 grams of
10 thousand milligrams so that's that's
about 10 grams that's what I've done in
the past but what's interesting is when
you get above news my newsletter is
great I mean I do lots of announcements
there is like I give commentary and a
stuff I'm scared I like publish on the
websites and I want to hear all the crap
anyways um like what are you scared of
no I'm just like you know there's I'm
not scared I guess that's the wrong word
I just want to deal with it right that's
the thing I just don't deal with it the
intravenous vitamin C is a completely
different game because it literally
generates hydrogen peroxide like when
you get like doses above you know when
you start to max out over that you know
plasma level 220 micro mol the vitamin C
itself so vitamin C kind of cycles
between being oxidized and reduced
it's called dehydroascorbic acid
dehydroascorbic acid or ascorbate
dehydroascorbic acid is the oxidized
form and hydrogen peroxides generated
which is really interesting because it's
one of the mechanisms by which at least
it's thought that intravenous vitamin C
kills cancer cells
it also has been shown to like kill
viruses and stuff in a variety of
different studies but that's interesting
because your neutrophils your
neutrophils generate hydrogen peroxide
so the intravenous vitamin C is like
generating hydrogen peroxide at the same
time it's also acting as an antioxidant
for for your own neutrophils and that's
been
to people you know in clinical studies
but also it's been shown that the
hydrogen peroxide does not damage the
normal cells like normal and Northey
normal healthy people give an
intravenous vitamin C it's generating
hydrogen peroxide but there's no
oxidative damage happening in people's
like lymphocytes and stuff so it's not
like damaging your own cells and how
often would you do this if you could one
study the studies that you know it
depends on on what virus you're looking
at like you know I mean for you
personally for just for health benefits
I would take if you just had access to
it every day how often would you take
intravenous vitamin C I you know it's
something because if you if you look at
the graph it's kind of a trains
intravenous vitamin C's transient so
it's like it's having it's not something
that like necessarily needs to be done
all the time it's something like I was I
was interested in doing it like my mom
was my mom had just gotten sick and um
like common cold you know she had like a
runny nose and stuff and so I took her
we went to get the the IBC and they did
it was 10 10 grams that we did and I
took it because I was like well she's
sick and I've been around her and like I
don't want to get sick so you know I
thought why not try it and you know so
so you know the intravenous vitamin C
maybe maybe there's like a reason to do
it but it's not something that I'm
certain that people need to do on a
daily basis it's different than like
vitamin C you know normal vitamin C you
do need you need to get it from your
diet it's important like it's important
for normal immune cells you normally
mean function that's been shown but I
but I know I'm starting to in review but
do you believe it's important to take it
orally as well as IV well the IV's is it
it's it's totally the IV is totally
different the IV is really being used as
a therapeutic treatment like it's it's
it's it's a therapeutic treatment more
you know the the ibc where it's been
shown to help with like for example it's
it's at least in state the hospitals in
San Diego it's routinely used for sepsis
like friends of mine you know use that
use it for treating sepsis and there's
been large randomized control trials
showing that it romantic lis reduces
mortality with sepsis so like that's a
especially in combination with Thiemann
as well like huge differences in
without people dying from sepsis which
is obviously very relevant now but
hasn't been shown I mean there are
clinical studies that are ongoing right
now some in China and some of the United
States looking at IBC potentially to
help treat kovat 19 associated pneumonia
you know the it'll be interesting to see
the data from those trials whether or
not there's going to be in effect it's
not known but the fact that it has been
shown to treat to improve sepsis
outcomes in in multiple you know studies
it's also been shown obviously cancer is
like a big one like that was like you
know Linus Pauling was like deemed a nut
like you know the Nobel prize-winning
chemist who basically is the vitamin C
guy like he back in the 70s was like
championing intravenous vitamin C for
for cancer patients because he was
claiming it was like you know curing
them quote-unquote curing them it wasn't
quite doing that but it was like
improving the outcomes of cancer
patients and there's all these studies
from the Mayo Clinic came out and they
were like nope doesn't do that turned
out they were using oral vitamin C which
is like comparing apples to oranges you
know so but now there's been so many
studies a lot you know how does a Mayo
Clinic fuck that up I don't know they
did that's so crazy they did yeah yeah
there were things that's who you would
depend upon when you wanted to know well
is this act I mean this looked at me to
go I don't know maybe they have like
they've definitely like gotten their
gotten more on games since then didn't
understand difference yeah who knows
back then I you know the pharmacokinetic
studies that I'm referring to I mean
those aren't those are briefs
Mark Levine at the NIH he's real like he
gets credit like he is really really
involved in putting that out there like
the difference between intravenous
vitamin C and oral or apples and oranges
completely different like and so until
that was known I guess maybe the Mayo
Clinic that just thought oh vitamin C's
vitamin C you just can take it earlier
and until like some of that data started
coming out the pharmacokinetic data
where it was like no it's not the same
thing like you're talking about seventy
times higher vitamin C levels in the
plasma like you could never do that from
oral like it's not the same at all
before that was known I guess maybe that
that's why
I heard people dismiss vitamin C saying
that your body only absorbs a certain
amount it's wasted if you take more than
that you do so here's the thing like so
so maximum bioavailability does occur at
200 milligrams and once you go above
that like when you switch if you take
500 milligrams of vitamin C orally you
start to excrete a lot in urine
but that doesn't if you look at the
plasma levels you're still increasing
them much higher your excreting more -
but you're you're increasing your plasma
levels more so you take 200 milligrams
you get your plasma levels of vitamin C
up to 90 you take 500 you may get it a
little bit more you take 3 grams you get
it to 220 yeah you're gonna be peeing a
lot out but you got to 220 right and so
if you look at these these common cold
studies there's like randomized
meta-analysis randomized controlled
trials and analysis about they've shown
that like you know 2 grams is better
than 1 gram for like reducing the
duration of the common cold two grams
better than 1 and children are more have
a more robust effect than adults so like
adults like it reduces the common cold
like 2 grams can do something like 20%
reduced a duration about like 20% or
something and that's children alike
emergency that company got a lot of shit
for their claims and there's grants I
said two grams emergency doesn't have
right so so then there you go so you
keep looking down there's more
meta-analysis another meta-analysis that
looked at 200 milligrams up to like 200
milligrams up to 2 grams and that study
kind of just lumped everything together
rather than the other study like ok what
happens is 2 grams and 1 and they did
all these sub analysis and that was
great because they like got to the
bottom of it dose matters the other
study it was like oh it reduces the
duration by like 4% you know basically
nothing so so there's like all this
there was all these conclusions it
doesn't do anything well yeah 200
milligrams look at that graph it does it
doesn't shit to your plasma levels like
you're still at baseline so I think that
people designing clinical studies like
they need like that needs to be in their
mind before they design their trial ok
what am I trying to measure here like I
want to get I need to like I need a
measurable like I need something to
measure and you got to change right to
get an outcome like if you want you're
trying to like see what
affect vitamin C has on whatever outcome
you're gonna want to wait ray someone's
plasma levels right so I guess it's good
at the end of the day to know that 200
milligrams doesn't do anything because
then you go okay well 200 milligrams
doesn't do anything but it's also good
to know that oh wait
if I take a higher dose there is an
effect so you know making this general
statement that Oh vitamin C
supplementation doesn't do anything is
not necessary specs yeah 200 milligrams
it doesn't do much for the common cold
but when you take 2 grams it can help
and also other studies have shown that
prophylactically slightly better than
like therapeutic so like after the onset
of symptoms so if you do it like before
symptoms like there's a better you know
how come as well so I mean that's all
kinds of interesting so for you
personally if you had the option would
you do it once a week
IV I'm it's pretty interesting yeah I've
like I was doing it I was actually doing
it once a week before enough once a
weeks enough totally I bet I don't even
know if it's necessary honestly wanted
to be honest because again it's a
therapeutic you know treatment I will
say this like my one of my friends she's
a she's an MD and she has reactive
Airways there's interesting studies that
have shown you know like that the
intravenous vitamin C is like
dramatically reducing inflammation as
well it's doing all kinds of crazy
things but her cough and it was very
transient it only happened like while
the IV while the vitamin C was high in
her plasma she's got this crazy calm and
you think she'd had Kovac he's like it's
just like a constant nagging cough you
know that it completely 100% went away I
noticed it and she like my friend is a
little bit you know she's a little bit
of a skeptic when it comes to the like
vitamins or anything like that you know
so I wasn't going to say anything cuz
her and I have gone and so on so many
debates about it so but she said
something and I was just like you know
I'm so glad and so she now she's wanting
to do it like she wanted to do it like
you know once a month at least
so mmm I thought that was you know
interesting you know again I don't know
that the intravenous vitamin C is
necessary there's also interesting
effects on like fat oxidation like it
affects fat oxidation because it's
important
for carnitine which isn't necessary for
oxidizing fat like there's been clinical
studies where people are like burning
more fat when they're exercising if they
have vitamin C and if they have low
vitamin C levels or not like burnings
much fat I think it's cause it's the
carnitine I thought that was really
interesting I didn't know anything about
that so we've been doing intravenous
vitamin C and glutathione and a bunch of
other stuff zinc once a week that's okay
yeah thanks another one that's really
you know important for immune function
as well and elderly people are more zinc
deficiencies not really common in the
u.s. most you know zinc is found in in
really high in oysters but not a lot of
people who always stirs the red meat
poultry you know if you if you eat
enough of that you should be getting
enough seen what about vegetarians
vegetarians do they they are more prone
to a zinc deficiency and in fact because
the zinc is bound to phytate it's less
bioavailable and they need to like eat
like up to three times more their RDA
needs to be like almost three times as
high for them or they can just
supplement which I know a lot of
vegetarians do but yeah but zinc seems
really important for immune function
like there's been studies where they've
like depleted healthy people of their
Zayn just transiently and like t-cell
function like is all messed up so it
like totally messes the immune system up
randomized controlled trials showing
that zinc zinc acetate or zinc gluconate
like lozenges
they can dramatically lower the duration
of common cold so is a citator gluconate
which one's superior so there was it's
like it was trending that acetate was
better
trending meaning was non significant
although it was like 40 percent versus
28% I don't like I to me lowering
lowering the duration of the common cold
by 40 percent versus lowering it by 28
percent I guess it was non significant
for whatever reason so they're saying
it's the study concluded that they're
both the same but it seems as though
acetate may be slightly better hmm maybe
slightly better but you know that I am
taking Zipp zinc is also a positive ion
so you need a zinc ionophore to help it
get in to cells so like quarry
flavonoids like quercetin quercetin is
found in like apples onions
buckwheat tea is which is what I drink
but you can supplement with it which
also supplement as well it some
questions interesting because it's in
Ghana for it's also been identified to
have activity against Sarge Cove one
antiviral activity against our scope one
doesn't have nootropic properties as
well I don't know that it has I don't
know it might be confusing it's it's got
sin oolitic properties which means it
can it's been shown it's been identified
as a possible compound that can clear
out some senescent cells which are those
cells that are you know they accumulate
with age and they're basically like
they're not dead but they're just like
not really functioning and they're
secreting they're secreting cytokines
and things that age nearby cells I
always like to think of like as
mentioning to Jamie that um maybe 40 to
next month and so yeah I'd have some
great nurse hey gray hairs and it's
funny how like you'll get one gray hair
and the other gray hairs like cluster
around that one with the clustering and
I always think of like because their
cellular senescence happens in the
melanocytes the you know I responsible
for pigment so I always think about oh
the senescent melania site is like
reading all this pro-inflammatory stuff
that's now accelerating the age of my
other nearby hair follicle melanocytes
causing them to anyways quercetin has
been identified to clear away senescence
cells so that's kind of cool
for aging fragright hairs no that's this
my like an analogy for people to
understand why senescence cells are bad
because they like age to other nearby
cells by secreting all this stuff
pro-inflammatory
anything I forgot to ask you about
vitamin D deficiency is red light
therapy what would that have to do with
vitamin D did I don't know do you know
about these red light machines that
people stand in front of yeah the photo
bottle photobiomodulation yeah does that
have any effect on vitamin D that's not
UVB okay it's different yeah yeah and
and i you know i think that that itself
it's an interesting field i would say
that
it's the marketing's got a little head
of a science for that but I do think
that there's there's promise
particularly for some treatments you
know there there are some claims out
there that are sort of being backed up
by very poorly done studies mm-hmm but I
think I think there's some promise out
there for it just makes you feel good
that's it yeah it's interesting I've
been doing it I tried I wanted to do it
before I even talked about it for a
month solid and I'd do it basically four
or five days a week and I just I don't
know it's hard to tell because I do so
much shit do you sauna yes that makes
you feel good every day every day I'm
doing it five days a week and I'm doing
seven days a week hundred eighty degrees
for 25 minutes dude I do 180 degrees for
25 minutes yeah unless it's if it's 190
or 188 then I'll do 20 but yeah I do 25
at 180 as well that seems to me the
sweet spot you know and I've been doing
it every single day of the quarantine
because I have a sauna in my house do
you have a sauna in your house we we do
well it's in our office which is like
just home up it's like it's like well
it's not you know but it's yeah just
right next door
much so we got that literally you're not
gonna believe it's like like three hours
before shelter-in-place was put in
California I mean I couldn't believe it
well we we had ours done just a few
months before I mean it was just I was
thinking like God if we didn't have this
in the house and you couldn't go
anywhere luckily we have one here so I
could use the one that's here but it's a
godsend
man changes everything it's a game
change it's a game changer and we I've
been doing so I haven't had a warm
shower since since the shelter in place
since I got my cell towers I do I do
it's amazing like I do I don't want to
make people feel bad look I went a long
time without a sauna I know what it's
like I was doing hot baths and we can
talk about that yet it is but there is
something about the sauna and then the
cold baths the cold shower sorry the
cold shower
that is just it is a game like I am so
much more relaxed and this is like I
think I've told you the story the whole
reason I got interested in this on
was because I was in graduate school
doing it like every day
and I was like this is amazing I am so
much less stressed I am like calmer and
more relaxed I'm happier yeah
something's happening so I was like into
the not even all the muscle and all the
cardiovascular I mean it mimics
cardiovascular exercise it really has a
big difference in my cardiovascular
activity it's been shown to people
there's a study this was I think Gary
Lakhan and who's a friend of mine just
he's like the best the leader and so no
research in Finland he published a study
where they looked at cardiorespiratory
fitness and cardio I think hearty other
cardiovascular disease risk markers in
people that were physically fit or
physically sorry physically active and
plus the sauna or you know just
physically act so so physical or just
sauna alone so physical activity was
like the king so like if you compare a
physical activity alone to sauna alone
physical activities the bath step
improving cardiovascular health sauna is
also good sauna and physical activity
together were better than the physical
activity alone which I was like yeah
that's what you want I don't remember I
don't your you're asking me like six
months ago or more but but that's what
you want right like you want like you're
like I'm already physically active I
mean you're like more physically active
than me and so but that's what you want
is like the combination it makes a big
difference once I started doing it
during the lockdown one of the things I
noticed the runs that I do the last Hill
is fucking brutal and I always finish on
this last hill but now I've been able to
run that last hill the last hill it's
like a market difference when I hit the
hill I'm like wow this is crazy either
I'm getting in better shape and I know I
am for sure but it's also I gotta think
the sauna has a big impact because it
feels like I'm on a drug it feels like
I'm on I don't know what EPO feels like
but I would imagine it would feel
something like this was the increased
cardiovascular benefit it's very
noticeable totally totally I mean
there's been some small studies looking
at you're talking about performance
enhancements there's been some small
studies showing that particularly with
endurance that there is a performance
enhancement can you think it was cycler
maybe it was running running
in cycling I've never measured your
heart rate during it so yes so here's
the thing with that like at first I was
like terrified to do that I said I want
to ruin my Apple watch you know I've
like ruined and like Kevin Kevin Rose
was like no just put your hand on I do
it all the time and like I like he's a
tech guy so I'm like all right Kevin
Rose tells me I can take my Apple watch
and the hot freakin Sun I'm gonna do it
right so um you know my heart rate it
can get up to like 120 but the thing is
is that there is adaptation that happens
so you're basically like you're you're
you're becoming adapted and so your
heart rate doesn't increase as much like
over time right and I'll be I'll be
honest I stopped wearing my watch in
there so I'm not measuring my heart rate
anymore like so you get a whoop strap
because the whoop strap is no problem at
all yeah yeah pee I'll get you one I'll
have one sent to you all right right
there one of the sponsors of the podcast
but I love it I would love to have
something to measure it without having
to take my watch in there because I
don't like sitting like it's things you
know
well the bootstrap measures it really
well and it'll give you like you could
actually mark it down as an activity and
I'll show you where your heart rate so
it's got a mountain of data it's really
good that's cool yeah let me also great
for sleep it shows you like really
accurate sleep it actually has a sleep
coach built in so it shows you like how
much sleep you got how much recovery
yeah your recoveries out and what you
need it'll even tell you you know hey
you should go to bed since you've been
getting up at 6 o'clock in the morning
you should go to bed by 10:00 tonight
nice had you noticed in effect so I've
been doing this honor every day I start
my days a week because I would do it
every day but I got to have you know
more time with my son but have you
noticed an effect on your sleep at all
yeah we relaxed do you need more sleep
though like you know like when you're
working out hard like you sometimes
require like more more sleep yeah yeah
boy when I do squats for sure anytime we
do lunges and squats and heavy leg days
I'm a zombie for two days and like if I
have a particularly intellectually
challenging podcast I'll skip leg days
because I know I'm just gonna be too
stupid I've done it before we're coming
in like I can't form some weird
not if you see what I'm doing there was
just weird there was a study that linked
there was a link between like leg
strength and cognitive function it's
very strong like the more leg strength
you had like the improve it was like
some kind of crazy number too
yeah it just makes sense that if you
have more leg strength that means you're
doing more activity that means you get
more blood flow that means everything's
probably fine because it's such an
enormous part of your body when you look
at your musculature the the large
percentage of it is from the waist down
and what I do when I'm doing leg work
like if I'm doing most of what I'm doing
is kettlebells
but I'm doing lunges and presses and
squats and all these different things
with heavy kettlebells so it's like it's
a lot of weight that your muscles are
pushing Dan is always trying to get me
to do squats like I don't know what a
vacuum when I was in grad school I was
doing squats and I was using the stuff
and then I was doing I guess what are
they called leg presses yeah and I like
injured myself and in this I want to
call it sky attica what's the other one
that's like sky Etica there's another
attica is is a nerve that comes from
your disks like right here yes well you
know what that's from though I don't
know what I I don't know what it is I'm
calling you sciatica most of the time
what you're getting is your lower back
you're having a your disks or protruding
and your discs like if you have a
herniation of the disc or if you have a
bulging disc it's pushing against your
nerve and that's sending that pain down
usually your butt and into your back
your leg and along those lines right is
that what you were getting it's only it
doesn't go into my leg it's just like me
this like right above yeah yeah yeah
that's it
that's a lot of times you think it's
that area but it's not it's your back
and it's your back with a disc pushing
into the nerves have you had an MRI now
you should have an MRI okay problem
because I'm sure you do squat like
squats or like like every time I do that
yeah I get a flare-up and it's like I'm
sure I'm out
well there's other things you can do to
strengthen that area like Wyatt like
well first of all there's a machine
called a reverse hyper it's fantastic
- yeah I have one out outside I'll show
it to you but it was created by this guy
Louie Simmons from Westside barbell he's
a he's a genius he's given us he gave us
this new platform - that's amazing -
what does that thing call Jamie it belt
squat belt squat I love this thing
because you wear a belt
and the the weight is actually pulling
the weight is behind you I'll show it
how it works before but you're on this
platform and all the weight is on this
belt instead of on your shoulders so you
can have like 250 pounds or whatever it
is but it's all being carried see that's
that's the thing right there the machine
but that's yeah that's similar to what
we have but the machine that we have is
a little bit more complicated but the
point is this guy comes out there and
pictures the females doing the reverse
hyper the reason why it's so special is
forget about this for a second here
there's a girl there's a girl using that
that is a more primitive version of the
one that we have out there the new one
that Westside barbell sent us it's just
a cable that comes through the floor and
the weights are actually behind you and
it carries you're carrying all the
weight on your hip so it strengthens the
legs without putting a load on the back
which is fantastic Wow I like that for
that so you can get all the leg work
that you get from squats but you don't
get the pressure on the disc and then
the reverse hyper is a machine that he
actually invented Louie Simmons invented
it because he had a herniated disk and
the doctors are telling them hey we have
to operate on you because you have this
compressed disc and so he's a very smart
guy and he knows so much about physical
fitness and weight training hit that's
Louie right there he came up with this
machine so he said well listen if if
something compressed it something can
decompress it so he came up with this
machine and with this machine the
reverse hyper does on the lift its
strengthening the lower back muscles but
then as you drop it down it swings low
and it actively decompresses of all of
your discs Wow it be so scared that's
gonna like aggravate it you know no no
no trust me first of all you could do it
with no weight the first you could do it
at first with no weight and that's how a
lot of people are when I introduce
people to it I have them do no weight
but from
it's been a giant game-changer so I do
that and then there's another thing by
Teeter Teeter makes this decompression
Dex it's called a de xx and from that
you hang from the waist you like strap
your I have that outside as well you
strap your ankles into it and you hang
from the waist and it just all your
that's it right there
so with that that lady right there in
that image she's holding on to those
handles and that's how you kind of get
yourself down but once you get yourself
down you just relax and all of your
weight see how that guy's doing it there
all your weight is decompressing the
spine so it stretches the spine out and
decompresses it and it gives you a lot
of relief so between those two
particular pieces of equipment the
reverse hyper and this dex to which
which I fucking love that thing
yak ya de x2 and there's when I get my
home gym
yeah that's made by Teeter Teeter has
two things that are really cool it has
those inversion tables which are great
for you know the same thing you're
hanging by your ankles and it's
decompressing your spine but I actually
prefer this product from them because
this completely isolates lates the back
and you're not pulling on your knees and
your ankles when you're decompressing
it's all just decompressing the back and
also you can do leg extensions and a
bunch of other that you see people doing
dips and other exercises from the Teeter
but it's a great machine and it's just
really specifically good for back health
lower back health decompressing it and
even strengthening it because you can do
those back extensions so you hook
yourself into it and you just lift your
butt everything that I'm scared to do
but it shouldn't be you shouldn't be
scared to do it because that's what's
gonna protect that area what's going to
protect that area is muscle and strength
and also flexibility work that would be
just incredible I guarantee you it's
gonna work because I'm so like the whole
time I had a gym membership or it's been
like on pause but the whole reason I had
one cuz sauna look I'm like scared to do
like I do free weights I have free
weights and I'll do that but like I'm
just scared of machines and all that get
you a trainer that's what I need that's
what you need because so many people
fuck themselves up by trying to do
things in their own
did and now I'm scared it's like this
like and now I'm I'm guarantee you it's
just poor form and all kinds of you need
to do more I'm a big like I go for my
thing is like my jam is like endurance I
love going for runs like you know and I
it's like huge like it's so great for
the minds right that's the reason I do
it like absolutely with this
shelter-in-place thing because I like to
do outdoor runs and I don't have a
treadmill or anything like that I mean
it was like I finally got a jump rope
and it came in right when the beaches
opened up but because I can I'm good at
jumping rope and just should have been
doing that but I was sauna every day and
doing you know I was doing so like I did
some like ballet stuff you know but like
I need to do resistance training like
muscle mass is important like for aging
for sure you known density it's also
density right lifting weights increases
bone density tendon strength so many
different variables that are so huge
because as your body gets older those
are the things that go south yes and I
you know a I'm gonna be 42 next month
so like ft 2 so yeah you definitely like
your fit you know so I need to I just
can't I can't ever let it go that's know
and I definitely like my diet I you know
that's dialed in and I'm definitely like
do the running and the sauna but but I
need to be better about resistance
training for sure I used to do yoga a
lot but you know I became a mom and
psyche I mean like I used to work out
like you know twice a day twice a day I
would do I would do my yoga or my ballet
and then I would run now it's like you
know did you realize how much work being
a mom was before you did it oh no I had
no idea
I mean it's have no idea it is I mean
it's tons of work I mean the same
sometimes I like it's like 3 o'clock in
the afternoon I'm like I never brushed
my teeth you know like I haven't
showered in a couple of you know the
sauna thing like I have to shower now
but like before before I was doing this
on every single day
yeah showers I mean it's like nap time
and say what kind of I can get work done
or I could take a shower what should I
do
yeah I don't work to do
no no thankfully I have help from my mom
my mom is like you know she's Nana so
she she helps out a lot so I can I could
actually get work done it's hard you
know being being a mom that's you know I
I have you know I run a business and but
I also like want to be a really good
mother so it's like yeah it's it's hard
it's balance is very difficult it does
help if you have some equipment in your
house you know that certainly helps yes
and that's like we've been like leaning
towards that and it's it's you know
we're slowly getting to the to the point
where we're gonna have more and more
where it's just like you you have to
have easy access it has to be something
you can just mmm you know do you need to
find the trainer just find someone that
can shimmy you can learn a lot online
but you have access to resources you
really need to find someone who's
willing to come and you live in a you
live in San Diego an awesome place for
fitness I mean there's so many people
down in San Diego that you could find
right yeah yeah and some gal who's
fucking jacked knows how to lift weights
you know and then I'll like inform them
all about the sauna and tell him all
benefits yes for sure yeah I'm sure they
can get a lot of I mean well I'm sure
there's someone listening to this right
now is probably gonna message you and
say I'll do it I'm your huckleberry hey
I wanted to tell you this about the the
I've been nice it's been like just
having having the effect I think the
first time I came on your podcast like I
know how many years it's been it's been
a while but I talked about this on yours
didn't yeah it was like what you were in
2020 now yeah more than that the first
time you coming so 2014 yeah because I
was still a postdoc so yeah 2015 I
stopped I cut that out like I finished
my postdoc so I published a couple
studies so I think it's 2014
but like the sauna you know it's just
been like something I came on up your
podcast the first time when we talked
about it and then of course continue to
you know publish videos and articles and
stuff and I'm writing a review article
for peer review publication right now
but there's a woman who reached out to
me she's she was
she had done her I think her PhD either
her PhD I don't know it's a psychology
but she had done it with a guy I
interviewed in the podcast dr. Charles
Rosen who is he's the guy who showed
that like a single hyperthermic
treatment which was with a device that
raised the core body temperature like
almost 3 degrees could have an
antidepressant effect
well she reached out to me and like the
FBI shut that whole machine down like no
you can't use that for research anymore
which kind of shut down the whole sauna
depression you know research area so she
basically she has gotten some funding
and she said she's doing a pilot study
with a new device which is something you
can like buy off Amazon where it's like
a sauna like your heads out but like
it's like a tent
yeah so it's a little different but it's
something that you know she's got to
prove that it's safe before like the FDA
will allow her to even like continue on
to like likes to study how it affects
depression and so um I've been able to
you know help help with connections I've
had helped fund new study she's going to
be doing where she's going to get
depressed patients to basically be
exposed to this sauna and it's like an
intense like she's like this intense
protocol where like she's like an hour
long and they get really hot and people
are giving them wet towels because like
it's like it's a like imagine being it's
like 140 degrees Fahrenheit so it's an
infrared but they're in there for like
an hour you know and they're getting
they raise their core body temperatures
are measuring that rectally so but she's
going to measure the effects on on you
know on depressed patients so it's
really exciting because and they're
gonna do like a dose response where
they're gonna see how many the Charles
raise on dr. Charles Rosen showed one
just one single session could result in
an antidepressant effect six weeks later
she's gonna do try to do eight sessions
like like where she can see if these got
people through course of how much time I
think it's gonna be once a week once a
week for eight weeks again and when you
say what is it the methodology like what
are they using so okay
were they using the reason that sauna
that I was telling you the same thing so
they're using that yeah that's the sauna
so she right now she her name is doctor
I'm a shoe before where they were saying
they cut
they wouldn't let him know it was a
device it was like this device that like
basically is sort of like a far infrared
thing but it would it would raise your
core body temperature through you know
infrared right so what is the difference
what difference when people ask me about
infrared yeah so infrared saunas the
main difference between infrared saunas
in like the regular dry saunas that you
and I use is that the the regular dry
saunas are heating the ambient air right
and that's then raising our core body
temperature through that mechanism the
infrared saunas are like they're like
changing electrons like they're like
directly heating they're like directly
heating your body basically without
having to heat the outside air as much
there have been some studies that have
compared I mean there's benefits with
these infrared saunas that in Japan it's
called way on therapy it's far infrared
and they use it it's been used to like
help even treat different cardiovascular
diseases like it's shown to improve like
Kourt like chronic heart failure or
something like that I think so there's
there's benefits with these with the the
infrared personally there's I think
there's a lot there's a lot stronger
there's much more research on not only
Dreyse honest but in Finland they take
they take this on a dry sauna it has
like these hot rocks and they pour water
on top of the the hot rock and so it
creates humidity right steaming and so
so that's really a common sauna like I
went in Finland a few years ago visited
Finland and some other saunas there in
Finland and so that's a very common
thing I think they call it like first I
call first of all they call it sound a
sauna and they call it weird we're
talking yeah Louella well or something
will they make this team do you pour
water on your rocks
so our sauna is like it's pretty small
it's a two-person sauna and yes so I can
get the humidity like up if I get it up
to 50% I feel like I'm like like I'm
burning looking yeah so um yeah if I'm
in a rush and I'm like I'm I got you
know I got things to do I got to you
right so up I'm like pour the pour the
water on the hot rocks to like just get
it real
feeling really hot mmm but pert my
personal favorite is like a nice 25
minute 180 no no water just dry like I I
like that but I'm so accustomed to 180
that I used one in Vegas and when I was
there it's like it was 160 I was like
this is ridiculous I could be here
forever and so I just started pouring
water on the thing I got 10 bottles of
water and I just pouring bottles of what
cuz it was just me in there right and I
got that fucker hot it was it was like
okay now now we're cooking and I was
sweating up a storm
it works I mean like I said ours is
really small and so like I mean you're
breathing like it's like there's a
direct formula to between the percentage
of humidity and then the increased
temperature the way it feels like if
it's at 180 but you have 10% emailed
humidity it's like yeah there is I don't
know what that formula is absolutely
there's a formula and in a lot of the
studies and coming out of Finland many
of the people there are using are doing
the the humid stones and saunas as well
so I mean I guess they're called finish
on us which means like they're using the
the hot water and steam it would be
amazing to have a sauna an outside sauna
that's right next to a frozen lake like
the way they do it oh yeah they cut a
hole in the lake and then get the party
so what we did I went I visited the
sauna Society and it was in November so
it was cold and it's right on a lake and
so they have like the day I went it was
not co-ed day so the you know it's only
women saunas that I went in there was
like it was like sectioned off but so
you go and you do these different they
have all these different types and I
don't remember and they're like whipping
each other with like birch wood and you
know which fractions yeah the Russians
like to do that they didn't they call it
the banya right the Russian banya yeah
they beat each other with this these
branches that are wet so okay let me
tell you my story anyways they jump in
the lake and they go back and they're
doing this right so here's my did I ever
tell you my crazy story on a story about
film engine crazy story so I have a
friend his friend he's you know he's
some of your friends are a little
eccentric right well this guy he's got
he's got a you know
huge property in like the country in the
woods like in Finland and select the
first time I ever went camping and it
was like snow camping it was crazy it
was like the worst thing ever like he
had yet us do this like there was like
two tents and and it was a conference
that I gave a talk at and so there some
people paid extra to like go to this
event that that was after it so there
was like 30 or so people there and they
were all from all around the world there
was only like three Americans me Dan and
some other guy no four Americans I think
but anyways um it was my first time
camping like outside like not in like
like I've been to Yosemite but I like
stay in a cabin weep in a tent right but
so it wasn't a great experience because
one there was this guy who snored all
night too
because it was snow camping we had to
like there was some weird day fire thing
and he wasn't that this guy was in the
military and so he had us do this thing
where like everyone had to wake up but I
forgot what it was every hour someone
you had a past this I say in a big wall
tent we were in a big I don't know what
it was called but I didn't sleep the
whole night and was awful oh but here's
my sauna experience so he doesn't
believe in you can't wear like swimsuits
or anything in the sauna so you have to
be like you have to wear no clothes or
if you if you really wanted you could
wear a towel like if you were modest or
whatever because to them it's like you
know no big deal the sauna you just you
don't wear any clothes okay I know they
told me they told me oh no the sanal is
in a sexual place and I'm like really
really you're human
I know so so so only three people were
telling me Dan and this other American
and so everyone was in there naked lots
of like there weren't that many females
but there were some from I don't know
the UK or and some German I don't know
but they were all naked like it was like
I guess Europeans are like that you know
like they're more used to it or that's
what someone was telling me I don't know
what the what the case is but anyways I
had people coming up to me going I love
your podcasts and this I'm like I'm not
gonna get naked before like a conference
and they were there and you like you
think I'm gonna be naked like in this
song I was like yeah
like in your face so anyways I'm in the
sonnet everyone's naked and then he and
the guy who is my friend okay he's still
my friend he's an interesting guy but he
had like people come and started doing
yoga
and they're naked like my my first
Finnish sauna experience where it was
like people are to open it was like you
can write towel if you want cuz he has
won't do it
I played get out of here you're not
staring at my junk yeah so then I
wouldn't they were all jumping in the
lake after and I'm like I'm gonna just
sit on this patio it's freezing out here
in Finland in November I'm not gonna
take my towel off and jump in the lake
for like fry can you wear a swimsuit
why says who like what is the difference
there's zero difference in the benefits
of a hey some cocaine it's a cultural
thing and also he claimed that there's
like toxins being released from one of
those assholes
fuck off buddy I got a swimsuit on and
then okay the yoga was bad it got worse
then he he had some whipping technique
with the Birchwood he wanted like to
demonstrate it so he had like one of the
Britain girls like she was like I mean
it was just like here's that here's the
truth like I was hot as fuck right so I
like I didn't care anymore
like I cared about my child but I didn't
care what was going on I was trying not
to look everyone you know like I didn't
want to see like you know very well
people get sexual - because it's hot and
sweaty and if this guy is like it sounds
like he's a little bit of a cult leader
right like someone needs to be naked
okay that's me that cuz he passed out
like this flyer because it's like we
were doing all these events you know all
these events were happening and his
flyer passed out it was like we're
reading it and I was like this you have
to you can't wear any clothes or some
suit or anything cuz I had packed my
sons I was like yeah I'm where my
students are yeah you can't tell people
they can't wear clothes
this is his own home sauna you know yeah
how convenient but you could wear a
towel so mm great
thanks buddy yeah
all that toxins talk too soon as
someone's talking about cleansing toxins
were like fuck off I was like so put off
with the talks and stuff like it's funny
cuz the sauna like that's like the one
like for years like all the benefits
about sauna we're always about toxins
right right they're always with toxins
what are you talking about like show me
what you're saying when you're talking
about you talking about just regular
sweat but it does you do actually you do
regular sweat it doesn't have to be from
sauna coming from exercise but you just
you do sweat out certain compounds like
aluminum aluminum flake it's funny that
you you can actually excrete certain
compounds better from sweat than urine
because that's another way of
eliminating things urine but aluminum
cadmium and there's one other that I
don't remember sweat it's like the best
way to get together just the
conversations you have with people that
are into releasing toxins it's like I'm
talking mumbo jumbo talk most of the
time I try not I'm trying not to judge
like I really have a hard time you
should when they start to go there I'm
like you should have a hard time and you
should judge I do well it's just they
say things that they don't really know
what the fuck they're talking about they
say it was such authority and I've had
those conversations in public saunas
before to work people are people like
they start getting into the toxins and
the whole Sun and like I'm just sitting
there quiet and I'm just like okay let
me start to tell you some benefits like
some real benefits cardiovascular did
you know that it actually mimics
exercise like literally like that's been
shown it's been like compared like 25
minutes in the sauna 25 minutes on a
stationary bike and same things are
happening you know like blood pressure
goes down afterwards heart rate
variability improves you know so same
things are happening you're increasing
plasma volume heart rate increases core
temperature increases right yeah
exercise is doing the same thing that's
the antidepressant effect like that I
feel from the sauna
and that Charles Rosen published you
know and that doctor dr. Mason will
hopefully carry on the torch it I think
it's real and I think that there's
there's potentially multiple mechanisms
immune we know modulations but also just
the fact that like BDNF you know there's
a study showing that hot baths do
increase BDNF
and BDNF brain-derived neurotropic
factor which why would you think
everybody would know what that means I
know brain dr9 D and F brain-derived
neurotropic factors yeah what's so
amazing about this neurotropic factor is
that it's always thought about in the
context of like brain aging because it
helps you grow new neurons it's
neurogenesis it helps us already
existing neurons survive but there's
studies now showing that it regulates
what's called neuroplasticity which is
like the ability like your brain your
brain changes you know with the changing
environment but you have to be able to
adapt to that right like children are
really good at that like they have a lot
of neuroplasticity
but neuroplasticity is its associate
with depression like not like not being
able like stressful conditions and stuff
like that like not being able to like
adapt I'm not using like the best of
terms but neuroplasticity is something
along those lines and so soon and BDNF
plays a role in mind BDNF has been shown
to be you know to increase with exercise
and also with heat stress I'm glad you
brought up hot baths cuz that's
something that I wanted to cover before
we got off track when we're talking
about sauna when people that don't have
access to a sauna how much benefit can
they get out of a hot bath Oh glad you
brought that up because there was a you
know so a couple of things one there was
a study that showed hot baths can have
an antidepressant effect and these
people were put in 104 degrees
Fahrenheit baths where they were up to
their shoulders for like 20 to 30
minutes and the Sham control was like a
green light like so people thought they
were getting a treatment they're getting
some kind of green light therapy or
whatever you know so it was a placebo
control because placebo is definitely
real particularly with depression and it
it had a pretty powerful antidepressant
effect very similar to Charles Rosen
study with the the hyperthermic chamber
thing when you say antidepressant
there's no real way to measure that they
have this
HUL yeah I mean so there are some cares
potential biomarkers being identified
c-reactive protein being one
inflammation inflammation plays a
there's like a huge link now between the
immune system and chronic inflammation
and depression brain function in general
bring an aging but inflammation so I
mean that's that there's there's a push
for looking but not all depressed
patients have it it's like there's a
subset absolute reactive protein but
yeah depressions measured it's a very
much like a you know have someone so a
subjective measurement would be a
clinical a clinical person like
measuring a whole battery of things they
do I forgot the name of the test but
yeah that's that's the test so it's like
basically a battery of feeling things so
it's not like a hardcore quantitative
biomarker which is so badly is needed
but um the hot baths have also been
shown so heat shock proteins which do
you like amazing there's so many amazing
things that heat shock proteins do
they've been shown to prevent muscle
atrophy and that's you know in the brain
they're so important like preventing
proteins from aggregating in the brain
that's how I first got in like one of my
first biological experiments ever
because I was a chemistry major in
college so I was doing all chemistry
stuff working a chemistry and like
chemistry but after I graduated I went
to work at the Salk Institute for
Biological Sciences in Hawaii I was
working in an aging lab and one of the
first experiments I had that I was doing
like one of my first projects was we
were taking the human amyloid beta gene
and and injecting him in these worms
these nematode worms that only live like
14 or 15 days and we were making them
form amyloid plaques in their muscle so
like basically you you look at these
little worms under microscopes is only
like half a mil or half a millimeter
you know they move around and I was like
they get older and they're aging they
don't move as quickly you know they're
kind of slower a little more decrepit
but anyways you give them this amyloid
beta and after like a couple of days
they become paralyzed or they're like
laying and their little petri dish plate
on the e.coli food you're giving them
and they kind of just move around just
to feed like their nose just moving
around and so when we would give them
tons of heat shock proteins in addition
to the amyloid
reversed it like completely mmm like
they would move around and be young so
anyways heat shock proteins play a role
in like neurodegenerative disease also
some links to like improving depression
in animal studies but can you measure
heating the baths versus yeah so that's
been done so the sauna I know of one
study where people that sat in a hundred
and sixty three degree fahrenheit sauna
for thirty minutes had heat shock
proteins their levels were fifty percent
higher over baseline and which is great
and that usually like animal studies
showed that that can they can stay
elevated for like 48 hours after that
there's a hot bath study where they also
elevated it wasn't quite as high but it
was like you know forty or so percent
higher than baseline levels and it was a
hundred and four degrees but this study
instead of doing it from the shoulders
down where I told you about the
depression it was like only twenty to
thirty minutes it was like from the
waist down so they had to stay in there
for an hour it's like a jacuzzi you know
what you're sitting there from the waist
down and like that's hot like saying 104
that's that's pretty hot but heat shock
proteins did increase so I think you
know for people that don't have access
to a sauna that hot baths absolutely are
a good medalie for heat stress and I
used it for a long time like I said I
just got us on like I've been I've made
a career about talking about saunas you
know and I just got one like last month
so like like I understand what it's like
to not have a sauna and to have to use
hot baths but I was also using the gym
saunas but right now it's like there's
no gyms that are open and so yeah
there's a hot baths are like the only
the only really choice if you don't have
a hot sauna an Oklahoma sauna what about
cold shock proteins and the I mean how
much difference is it between taking a
really cold shower ice bath versus
something like cryo cryotherapy like the
place that I took you to yeah so I mean
there's there's differences in in I mean
so it depends on how long you're staying
in a cold you know water like hold
shower like actually being submerged
like from like if you're like in the
ocean or something or a lake and you're
like from your shoulders down like
that's probably much more powerful than
just having the shower but by the way
the shower
like some days I'm like what doesn't
matter this this is not cold at all you
know it's just so variable where you
like Southern Southern California you
live on the right the border of Mexico
yesterday so so ever so most of time now
I shower right off his phone that's like
my shower time now and so like it's I do
about six minutes and it's so easy for
me I totally have adapted and I'm not
sure if I've just totally adapted or if
it's just like my faucets doesn't get it
just doesn't get cold that cold like it
really doesn't today I took a cold
shower from home and my son is not there
and I did it just because I wanted to
have the mood affects the north and
Efrain that's been shown to be increased
and it was much colder but then again it
was a different shower I'm not sure if
it's because I didn't have the hot
before you know beforehand like the hot
being hot I'm like getting in the cold
shower like it just feels really good
nice shock but the cold shock you were
asking me cold truck proteins the that
that hasn't really been measured in
humans what is measured most the time
with cold truck is norepinephrine
release and norepinephrine in plasma and
there has been studies correlating
norepinephrine in plasma upon cold
exposure norepinephrine release in
plasma to in the brain where it's
involved with like mood and focusing
attention so there's been studies we're
like you could do a two-minute cryo
whatever the average temperature it's
really cold - 240 something like that
yeah and then that could be compared to
like you know a longer a longer duration
in 50 degree you know I think 50 degree
fahrenheit water or something like that
I don't remember the exact time but but
it is comparable but you have to stay in
a longer duration so some people prefer
ice baths some athletes prefer the ice
baths versus Carl therapy even though
it's it's probably more painful because
it lasts a lot longer have you done no
no no I've done it I've only done the
cryo so I've have you ever done like
cold shower after your sauna yes do you
like it I like it a lot I like it
particularly after hot yoga after hot
yoga after hot yoga especially in the
winter when it's actually cold the water
is cold that's when I love it there's
something mood-enhancing I mean these
things also affect the immune system
which is also very relevant both cold
and burn and hot they both have been
shown to increase
lymphocyte numbers and also like other
myeloid cells and stuff
I mean people but but like there's
something like I've done the sauna and
then gone into an ice bath and then you
know it's just really it's hard it's
cold I mean you feel good but man you
know I think just like got the guy's
house I was doing and I was trying to
impress them so you know I'm hardcore
but it was it was pretty intense I do I
do eventually want to get some kind of
like they have those like like ice baths
that you can like regulate you like
regulate the water temperature yeah ones
that you plug in yeah they're not ice
baths exactly it's cool this is too much
work like yeah yeah yeah we wanted to
get one here we're probably gonna wind
up doing that get one here good because
you have two showers and what the shower
Nexus song is kind of useless so who
uses the sauna here Jamie just me you
don't use this on occasional occasion
yeah yeah I also had a gym I was going
to for apps did you do use this on other
right yeah yeah I use it everyday I
usually use it at home but sometimes I
use it here when I like right after
workouts like if I work out I try to get
a workout here before you know like
before I do podcasts and I'll time it so
they have an extra hour so I can get in
the sauna that's awesome
yeah it makes a big difference for me
but I also just I think it might be a
little too much before like I'm always
trying to regulate how much activity I
do with whether or not I'm gonna be
exhausted when I do a podcast because I
used to do yoga and then I would come
out I would get out of yoga at 11:00 or
at 10:30 and I would do a podcast at 12
and I was like I think I better wait
till 1:00 cuz I'd just be so because
90-minute yoga classes in the 105
degrees is fucking rough it's intense
it's rough yeah I've only done Bikram a
couple times I would love to like do it
more I loved it yeah I really loved it
well I would wonder and I know there's
there's supposedly some sort of Harvard
study that's ongoing right now measuring
all sorts of markers and people that
have done hot yoga and whether or not it
mimics heat shock proteins that are
created in the sauna because the thing
is like you are getting the
incredible cardiovascular exercises your
hearts beating like crazy and you know
you're not doing cardio per se but your
heart rate goes get jacked because of
the heat and the stress and then on top
of that even though it's only a hundred
and five degrees your body is heating up
you're you're really sweating up a storm
in there maybe it's I've taken some
friends there that have never
experienced it before and they're like
fucking you over come on and then they
get in there and then I look over at
them fifteen minutes they're like
fucking hey and I'm like yeah it is told
you it's not it's not what you think it
is because you're doing like yoga you've
been uncoupled from the heat strip like
the hot part Yoga is is also like it's
pretty intense like holding those
positions and stuff and like your heart
rate does start to elevate I mean it's
like just from that alone adding on the
sauna which mimics moderate physical
activity that's been shown absolutely
mimics it and then all that you know
studies that have shown that on top of
that I mean that's like it's it's it's
super intense it's do briefings the
really cool thing about and I want to
get my mom I think once we move this on
I like to our home where it's not like
the office like I wanna people that are
not people that are sedentary and people
that are sedentary for whatever reason
maybe their sedentary because they're
disabled or maybe their sedentary
because they've had a lifetime of being
sedentary and it's they it is just hard
to get them motivated to go exercise
like the sauna to me is like that's so
important because it's giving these
people a potential cardiovascular
workout know it is that's been shown
it's giving them a cardiovascular
workout without having to force them to
go for a run or going up and sit down on
a bike you know that people think like
when you tell them go sit in the sauna
they think of like a spa like yeah I
want to go do that you get someone who's
like like my mom who she's she's
sedentary you know she's not like a
physically active person and she needs
to be um but like the sauna that's
that's kind of my goal is to get our
doing and we'll have to start slowly
because you have to adapt you know the
heat shock proteins help with that as
you the more the more times you're
exposed to heat stress and the more
adapted you are like the the heat shock
proteins increased quicker and so it
held it's part of the adaptational
process as well of you know being able
to handle the heat stress
but like I want to get her to do that
because like any you know any
cardiovascular improvements gonna help
her moon it's gonna help her her you
know all cause mortality that's been
shown you know four to seven times a
week forty forty percent lower all cause
mortality cardiovascular mortality these
fifty percent lower you know so like I
think that's a really cool thing about
the sauna is that you can get people
that are disabled people that can't go
for a run you know I mean I still think
exercise I mean it's just the best thing
ever no period for everything right you
know for everything it's just gonna
overall improve the way you age and
that's going to make you more robust and
resilient to anything yeah sauna to me
is minore the big ones is that muscles
feel better they feel looser they've
they're not as sore like when I have
hard workouts and I get in the sauna
afterwards I feel like from my
recoveries more rapid interesting that's
interesting
yeah I because I don't do resistance
training shame on me I don't I don't
have that same perspective but it there
there happen studies at least were
localized heat on people that had a limb
immobilized I don't remember what limit
was but after a week people that had the
heat treatment local heat treatment had
almost 40 percent less muscle atrophy
and huge in animal studies and like I
remember I like shared this animal study
and an article I wrote years ago before
the human study came out and like
they're critical its animals and you
can't say it does this and I would get
on the mechanism they showed it was heat
shock proteins and there was all you
know like and I was so happy when that
human study came out I was like told you
just a few of those those guys that he's
like you're like maybe I just I don't
know like do a big comprehensive search
to the literature and understand things
and you know don't have that exact study
just yet but like I know that it's gonna
help with muscle atrophy so people love
to dismiss things don't they yes even
even if they're wrong they just love to
like fixate on confirmation bias a
little possible potential things
you don't miss it instead of just being
open-minded and going hmm I think that
happens a lot too with like social media
because like for example if I share one
study I'll share like an epidemiological
study and it's like it's Twitter you
know I'm doing 140 carry or whatever the
chain I don't know what the characters
are now but I'm doing a small number of
characters and I'm just sharing one
study and if it happens to be a non
randomized controlled trial then you
know it's just correlation doesn't you
know doesn't equal causation and sake
sometimes I just share a story because
one I think it's interesting or two
because I've read a bunch of you know
evidence surrounding this topic you know
about all the other clinical evidence
all the genetic halves all the animal
like and and so I have a knowledge base
here and so I share a study that may be
isolated in and of itself is not the
strongest study but you know it's like
just can't like I can't someone else
trying to strike up a conversation in
the Porta Potty because it affects me
like I'm the kind of person where like I
like to make people happy like it
bothers me when people are like unhappy
it bothers me when people like well then
I don't go on Twitter period because
muscles people are unhappy or YouTube
now I mean it I I guess that's not
really the case I for me at least I the
bigger audience that for you for sure I
mean the bigger your audience is the
more you get that this is what I tried
to explain to a friend of mine who was
on the podcast who read the comments and
I go just have to stop and think okay
even if just 1% of all of my people that
go from Instagram like if you're reading
the Instagram comments 1% are assholes
just one but which is probably really
conservative right if you get a room
full of people there's a hundred people
in the room what are the odds that one
of them is gonna be an asshole it's a
hundred percent right that means there's
ninety two thousand assholes that's a
lot that's untenable you can't manage
that right ninety-two thousand shitheads
who have half assed their whole life and
they want to just be a bad day they want
to shoot people down make people feel
bad and just don't yeah it's not worth
it I don't and
it's and I feel for those people I
genuinely do I feel for people that are
in that state where they realize that
they're they're not they're not happy
they're not happy with their own
performance and not happy with their
life they're probably not happy with the
relationship or their job and they just
want to spew nonsense and negative
garbage yeah I mean that's that's the
problem with not being able to solution
is really delicious yeah chill Clif 25
milligrams CBD all right thank you
okay I got some other flavors to the the
problem with that is you'll fixate on
the one person that says the negatives
ackley it's a natural human inclination
and that that fixation for me keeps me
up at night it doesn't happen much
anymore because like I try like not to
read I've gotten so much do you know
what I'm talking yeah no in the early
days of social media before I got a
handle on it I'd be like fuck this is
their stress it's like so taxing like
you'd get into discussions with people
like what am i doing I think it's
important to be critical and I get like
you know there's there are people that
are really trying to like make you know
prove something and there's there's all
sorts of incentives for being
hypercritical well if you had rational
people who are kind folks who have
interesting viewpoints and they looked
at something and they found something to
be wrong with that and they handled it
with you know grace and some sort of
modicum of dignity and kindness that
would be great
yeah I mean if there are those people
sure like if you were having a
discussion with a good friend and the
good friend was looking at something
that you said and said I disagree
because of this look I have
conversations with good friends all the
time and even on the podcast where I
disagree with them but we handle it like
friends right but that's the problem
with Twitter's it you don't see that
person you don't you know you don't know
them you don't want to please them you
just want to be mean you know and that's
what a lot of people are doing and
they're just getting their rocks off to
exert and I feel like now for a while
during the pandemic when it started and
the lockdown started people were nicer
there was less social justice
outraged was less this but now it seems
like as times going on and people
getting more frustrated and more
desperate and more depressed because
they're locked up it seems like it's
ramped up it's hot I mean this is
unprecedented right I mean being it is I
I miss I miss my life before the
pandemic I miss taking my son to the
park I miss our soccer classes and I
mean like music classes I miss it it is
hard kids are having drive-by birthday
parties where they drive by with fucking
bombs yell out the window happy birthday
like fucking the they're never gonna
forget this then they're gonna feel how
weird this is they're doing all their
their classrooms on iPads I'm like this
is so weird
see my son's at an age where he's this
is he's not gonna really remember well I
mean depending I you know I really think
that I think things will start to will
start to get better well it doesn't I'm
gonna move to a place where it's better
because I think the way this cut this
state is handling it is fucking terrible
they're treating us like we're infants
some of the lists they've given you of
approving activities and non approving
activities that's highlights it for me
because the list sir I don't know if
you've seen they haven't I didn't even
know that Oh
pull it up Jamie they're so fucking
stupid because you got to realize these
people that are writing these lists
these are not experts these are
bureaucrats these are politicians these
are people that really have no business
telling you what to do and what not to
do
they're fools but they're in a position
to influence millions and millions of
people so they have the ability to tell
40 million people what they can and
can't to make that a little larger so I
can read this look at this athletics
badminton singles throwing a baseball
softball BMX riding canoeing singles
crabbing you know crabbing you'll find
crabs cycling exploring rock pools oh
can I can i exploit rock pools you fucks
gardening not in groups golf singles
walking no cart what why why can't I
take my cart
who are you Wow hiking trails and paths
allowing distancing horse riding singles
jogging and running it gets gets grosser
meditation oh you can do outdoor
photography I didn't know I thought that
was gonna kill everybody wait what what
what kids what's the top of this what's
this headlight what is this pain proved
outdoor activities it's for an LA or for
the California gets worse
kids scroll down it gets so stupid
towards the end a look soft martial arts
Tai Chi cung not in groups Chi cung
they've listed the martial arts like
fuck off Table Tennis singles trail
running trampolining oh can I get our
trampoline thanks didn't know how about
this one
watch this sunrise or sunset how about
wash the car oh you can wash the car oh
great
that's crazy I thought rocks were fallen
from the fucking sky and I couldn't
watch the car Jesus Christ but that's
what drives me bonkers in all cases you
should only do these activities alone or
with members of your household make sure
you keep six feet of distance between
you and those outside your household you
fucking power have you been like doing
comedy bits like no have you been were
like sorry writing no no no I've written
anything no yeah I thought it should but
I even I've decided to just just accept
where this is and then when comedy clubs
are about to open up then I'll start
writing again but I'm just I'm just
accepting where this is and I wanna I
want to have an honest take on it I
don't want to be manufacturing it take
we're trying to like come up with some
sort of a hot take on how I feel but I
want to know how I really feel about
this and how do I really feel about this
is very different now versus the way it
was in March because in March I was
concerned and I was like Jesus Christ
this could be terrible like we really
have to stockpile food we really have to
make sure that we have water
purification we really have to be
careful here now I'm like we got to be
careful these fucking politicians now
I'm in the place well you you guys have
to understand these people people are
starving people don't have any money
you're telling people they can't go to
work but you're telling people that can
go to work in some places like why is it
okay to work at Target but it's not okay
to work in a family business why is it
okay you know let's let's figure out
testing let's quarantine the people who
are sick this strategy that you guys
have you're not adjusting and adapting
you're not adjusting and adapting to the
numbers the mortality numbers to because
they're way lower than they were before
Plus now we have this understanding of
the asymptomatic people and how many
people have tested positive that are
asymptomatic it's off the charts it's
somewhere in the range in many studies
of 70 plus percent of people that get in
contact with this do you are
asymptomatic but test positive for the
disease that's crazy
asymptomatic yes so that's the thing we
gotta be careful about forty to fifty
could be like there's probably a range
entire disease it's out of their system
they never felt it yeah I have one
friend who he did he had tightness in
his chest but he actually was in outside
of mahon like in December so he was like
he got it like at the time he just
thought it was some like a little like
whatever that's cold
chest yeah but it was like just mostly
just tightness he said it wasn't like
you know well that's what's crazy about
this it's so there's so many variables
in terms of like how people how people
are affected by it and what goes wrong
because there are so many variables yeah
there's your your your genetics there's
your immune system like how is your
immune system shaped yes what your
there's your diet that's included in it
your vitamin D status your you know
there's there's you know the other
interesting thing and there's been no
studies with stars co2 but there have
been influenza studies showing that
viral dose it's really interesting
studies that have been done where I
don't know who volunteers for these
studies but like sign me up to get in
point so I want to be get people healthy
people that to do that and there's been
these studies where people are like
control Nate intranasal like they'll
give them various titers of influenza
virus and they try it the point of the
studies to figure out what viral dose
and they have like some measurement like
an beat in tissue culture number or
whatever and they found like to make
people have symptoms right and they
found with influenza I forgot which a or
something I think one of the strains it
was like they could do a certain dose
like 10 to the 7 in tissue culture or
whatever units where it's 70 percent of
the people would get like symptoms
ranging from a fever you know COFF and
all the influenza you know flu symptoms
but then when they went down to from 10
to the 7 let's say they went down to 10
to the
five only like 10% and people were
getting so like it's kind of interesting
that viral dose at least with influenza
and there's actually been some other
studies I think measles also the it is
it is a thing not something that you
want to like go and experiment with
yourself but you know that's another
possibility right for sure when you hear
about nurses yes they're getting way
more sick right because they're I mean
that could be one reason right right
there their actual job is to be around
infected people and their intubating
these people and they're they're they're
deranged it's like oh yeah you're right
in their faces right but some of them
they have poor PPE especially in the
beginning when you're seeing these
people that were like using a makeshift
masks and trying to it's horrible yeah
they're I think with the masks you know
for people I mean reopening the economy
and you know some places have more been
more successful you know like you know
even even like Japan and stuff where you
know the wearing the masks like the
cloth mask doesn't do much to prevent
you from breathing in maybe our
respiratory droplet or something or
aerosol right that you know but but it
will prevent you from spreading it you
know to so to a certain degree like I
get that people don't want to wear masks
like it sucks like who thought you know
who wants to wear a mask but maybe to
open up the economy again like now maybe
like everyone could wear a mask if
they're going to be inside around a
bunch of people then keeping the economy
close better than keeping the economy
close I'll be willing to do it it's not
gonna be forever you know why it's not
gonna be forever because we're gonna
figure this stuff out we are like it's
already we're already finding repurposed
therapeutics the monoclonal antibodies
people are working on that that's going
to be coming soon what is that the
monoclonal antibodies remember you're
talking about the llama so the whole
point of that is that they're
identifying antibodies that can
neutralize the virus and they're gonna
grow them and manufacture them and give
them to people
it'll help treat eventually they'll
identify one that you know work what
kind of a timeline do you think they
have for something like this I think
that I think things are gonna I mean I
think that these therapeutics can start
the monocle so like REM Jesse beer has
already been identified and there may
start to identify other
like the pancreatic pancreatitis drug in
Japan chemists at something
there's the pepcid I mean there's a lot
of different repurposing drugs that are
being investigated you know and I think
over the next couple of months and then
returned already you know doing one of
these monoclonal antibodies I think in
the next couple of months well we'll
have more therapeutics than we have
right now and that that'll that'll make
things less scary people will be less
scared of getting sick because they'll
have you know they'll have a better idea
of oh we have some more you know things
that can therapeutically treat this you
know successively hopefully people are
gonna start looking at the vitamin D I
really like that I really hope that if
not just I hope people are gonna you
know take their vitamin D or ask their
doctor it's hey kit you know um but yeah
I think that in a couple months so like
can you wear a mask for a couple of
months and like here's why it's not
going to work to just have the people
that are vulnerable wear the masks
because the cloth mask isn't going to
prevent them from getting you know the
aerosol eyes droplets if you're
spreading it in asymptomatic which is
that it's been shown that you if you re
symptomatic that CDC study I mentioned a
while ago about how pre-symptomatic
versus asymptomatic after a week when
they came back to measure the people
again they found that out of the
thirteen ten of them actually did get
symptoms the other three that were
asymptomatic had as much they were they
had were spreading I'm sorry shedding as
much virus that could make them you know
basically contagious and you know be
basically able to transmit that strain
so the point is that I think that I know
people don't want to wear masks and I
have I have family members that like
think it's like infringing their freedom
you know and like it does suck and I
know people are worried I mean the thing
is like also children I don't know how
to tackle that issue cuz it's really
hard that's that seems a little more
difficult but like adults you know and
you know I think that if you're working
when I open your your your restaurant
back up you're you know like no mass I
think that that seems like a good
compromise right it doesn't the children
it's real weird with this disease
because the some children are getting
sick but it's a very small number but
many children are getting in contact
with this disease and how many of them
are asymptomatic but are spreading it so
there's been there have been quite a few
studies looking at children that are a
symptomatic children that have mild
symptoms and children that are
symptomatic and so far so far the
studies have shown for the most part
that children even that are asymptomatic
are shedding as much virus as both
children that are symptomatic and adults
that are symptomatic meaning they're
light they're able to transmit it
they're shedding the virus right
sprinkler systems they are they're
fairly like I used to never get sick and
then I became a mom and I mean I think
first of all the first year it hit me
hard because I wasn't sleeping you know
because you have to like every three
hours you got a feed you know feed the
baby
it's a giant factory immune system Oh
sleep is huge we didn't talk about that
I know you've had Mount Walker on the
podcast I've had I mean he's talked
about it before and lots of other
researchers have studied this sleep is
so important for immune function I mean
so important but I mean we're all not no
one's working because they're probably
getting more sleep now but they're all
so stressed out and they have anxiety in
particularly if their bills are piling
up and they have no true it's awful it's
really awful
it's really awful it's awful for some of
these people that didn't do anything
wrong they didn't do anything wrong you
built a business and now that business
is crushed man I think you got to have
the option you got to give people the
option to go to work you have to you
can't you can't do this especially give
him an option but awarenesses yeah this
is not the plague that we thought it was
going to be this is not the horrible
tragedy it's not it's not it's
definitely not like I'll agree with you
on that like I think like a month and a
half ago I mean I thought I was gonna
see body bags in the street like I was I
was like this is like gonna be really
bad I was terrified and it thankfully
has not been that bad I mean New York
City got hit pretty hard but you know
we've we have been on lockdown so that
has to be counted for you know I'd like
to see I mean in New York City
particularly when they were getting hit
you got to think this is New York City
in January which is January it's
wintertime people are not going outdoors
I wonder how much the vitamin D
deficiency varies dependent upon the
winter it's been shot there's been tons
of studies showing that vitamin D levels
are much lower in the wintertime it
so correlates there's been studies
correlating it with seasonal affective
disorder and all that but yes January
all those it's vitamin D deficiency is
lower for sure but I would like to see a
study on whether or not it varies
between the East Coast and the west
coast because over here we do have all
these sunny days and power right outside
far more often than they are in New York
yeah and they wear less clothes they're
wearing t-shirts there were in shorts
you know you have more skin exposed
someone might have done that study I
would like to see that study because it
makes sense look and people are shittier
over there maybe that's why they're
shittier you know I mean they're cold
and grumpy I'm sure but also maybe that
is not feeling well because vitamin D
deficiency plays a factor in that as
well and I will also like to see
something done on whether or not that
contributes to how many people get sick
over there because when I lived in the
East Coast when I lived in New York I
got sick way more than I get sick out
here I'm for sure healthier more
cognizant definitely more I think all of
those things play a role personally I
think that you know that there's been
enough evidence showing that vitamin D
plays a role in is particularly
respiratory infections i psychosocial
stress like stress cortisol like that
but dampens the immune system you know
so when you are stressed you're you're
you're basically you're not in a good
situation to to fight off as you were
mentioning with your friend when you're
stressed out like your immune system is
is dampened and you're you are more
susceptible to illness for sure and
that's also that's also known you know
so I think all those things and then the
sleep yeah that's why it's so rough with
all these people stuck inside and
stressed out you know all these the
financial pressures that people are
experiencing right now because of the
lockdown yeah it's really it's so awful
yeah it is horrible it's horrible and
it's not getting better I hope I just
hope I hope that you know we can reopen
the economy in a very safe manner where
we don't have like flare-ups that you
know we don't want to be set back to
like shelter in place again like so long
you know I'm not gonna do it again I'm
definitely not gonna do it the way it
was before if it's the same disease I
don't think it's warranted it doesn't
make any sense to me I think not if
right I think social distancing makes
sense I think sanitizing making sure
you're you're using hand sanitizer and
cleanliness and all that good stuff and
if you want to wear a mask in public
that makes sense too okay I get it but
this it's like inside when you're in
places I think like if you're going
grocery shopping yes sure but test
people how about that
absolutely at work I mean I test
everyone that comes in here you told me
he'd been tested and I guess got tested
again on Sunday I tested and I'm clear
and I did that right when I got back
from Jacksonville because I'm was like
look I'm in Florida even though
everybody's been tested I'd like to get
tested again just just for the fuck yeah
I'm hoping that the accuracy of the PCR
test improves I don't I have you know I
don't know if there's like a but you
mentioned one test that might be coming
now I hope that's saliva but yeah yeah
you know I don't you know I'm not sure
what factor do you think play like when
we're talking about solids before one of
the things this is a respiratory disease
and this is something where you're
breathing in these particles and from
what I understand that this is a
vulnerable virus in terms of the the
temperature that it can survive in yeah
obviously it's in your body but when if
it's in your nostrils or if it's in your
respiratory tract and you're breathing
in that heated sauna air does that have
any effect at all on viruses I think you
know that hasn't really been studied you
know it if the virus is like right in
your nostrils I don't know maybe but I
think it's already like getting its if
it's already getting inside you know the
the respiratory you know area like your
body's kind of maintaining homeostasis
so like the agent will reveal some of it
off by way and reduce the viral load I
don't I think that I think well now I
think what's actually the sauna is
actually just it's improving your immune
system and I think that doing the sauna
is making you more resilient a guest
against infection like they're you know
like like that's been shown there's been
small trials showing that people doing a
sauna
I forgot the the duration but they're
you know they were much less likely to
come down with the common cold but you
know they had to be doing it for like at
least three months like it wasn't just
something that you could like you're
mentioning you know at the
of getting it also the respiratory
illness connection there have been
correlation studies out of Finland
showing that people actually I think the
study was men in only men that do use
the sauna two to three times a week
they're 27% less likely to have
pneumonia after correcting for and their
if they use this on a four to seven
times a week they're forty forty-one
percent less likely to come out
pneumonia after correcting for
socio-economic status physical activity
cholesterol lung you know smoking COPD
like asthma all those like you know lung
disorders so you know the sauna does
seem to hat be associated with lower
incidence of pneumonia but it's thought
to be because of immune you know
perturbations and also like the there's
a heat shock proteins and all those
things like help there's like an
antioxidant effect in the lungs like
things like that so heat shock proteins
also do have antiviral activity against
at least influenza A so the heat shock
proteins directly can activate your
innate immune system but they also have
antiviral activity against influenza
virus so you know III think that this
that the heat stress in the sauna does
help now there's another study that did
look at humidity and the effect of
humidity on basically like the ability
of your epithelial cells and your airway
and nostrils and stuff to filter out
particles in particular matter and like
viruses and stuff and and humidity
actually made a big difference like
humidity like the higher the more humid
the better that was was acting basically
able to you're able to like filter out
stuff whereas dry it was like make sense
so it does make sense but I don't yeah I
just don't know the answer to your
question I'm not sure I when the whole
thing started when the lockdown started
I was getting the sauna really hot then
I was pouring a bunch of water on a nose
breathing big long deep nose and it was
burning yeah but I feel like I'm killing
you bitches don't count all you dirty
viruses
I would take these long deep nose and
the whole inside of my nose would be
like stinging and everything but I was
like it's gotta be killing these things
but then you know I was talking to a
doctor about it he's like you well you
know I was like would it I was like
osterholm right yeah I was asking him
was it hostile or is it but I was a ho
test maybe yeah oh and he was like you
wouldn't be able to breathe in that
temperature would it wouldn't it
wouldn't be hot enough to kill out of my
huh maybe the way you do the song like
how like you know people think about the
song they just think about sitting in
there and breathing you know your
breathing it's like the the the steam is
hot
I mean burning but the question is is
like you know there's there's
homeostatic processes in these cells and
stuff and so is it actually I was doing
the sauna too hot at one point in time I
was doing it at 210 degrees because of
crazy Laird Laird Hamilton had me
confess that snot I did I've done I
haven't done I have like I've been to -
Rick Rick Rubin's house and we've done
like it was like 200 and something there
did I talk but like I was about to like
go to one of his I was like literally
gonna get on a plane and go to quiet and
I'm like Laird I'm doing this xpt thing
I'm bringing my son we're gonna all like
make a trip and this it was happening in
March like okay one day one day Laird
will do it so he gets in over 200
degrees with a fucking aired on bike
with oven mitts on this crazy asshole is
riding in airdyne which and I say crazy
ass all with all due respect because I
love the guy but he's right here air
time machine in a fucking sauna I'm like
bro I so I did that 200 I bet you was
the same because they like do the same
protocol like and this was like 210 or
220 it was so hot like like like I I was
I was like on some kind of mind-altering
drug and I think that's the point with
those guys it's the other thing that
happens is and then we'd go into this
ice bath and there's like this bath
right outside and we're
did all this ice and I like I said I was
like trying to impress Rick so I was
like staying an ice bath long as I could
you know back into the sauna and in like
getting back into this like two hundred
and ten or twenty degree sauna and you
feel like it's like room temperature
because you were just in this ice bath
it's the weirdest feeling is right and
then you do that like we did it like
three or four times I don't remember but
but I was like I started out the
conversation I was like he took her
proteins and I was like talking science
and at the end of the conversation I was
just spilling everything I was like
telling them all those it was just kind
of you open up basically hang I don't
remember but I wasn't talking sighing
the sun's gonna explode and it's gonna
create carbon it's gonna create more
life-forms yeah I think I think Gabby
Gabby
Laird's wife she she has a podcast early
she don't know if she still does it's
called like the truth barrel or
something it was at one time I don't
know the names changed or not but I
thought that was so awesome because she
named it after like the sauna because
the truth comes out you just start
talking like yeah start you know it's
intense
there's my watering anyways 210 degrees
I was finding that it was burning my
throat and I think I was doing it too
often too it was burning my ears and my
head so we were it was dry for us so I
wasn't I wasn't experiencing that as
much but I had to like get on the floor
because like I felt like my hair was
gonna fall out like it was burnt you
know it was just so hot so how long he
gave me a hat so I don't remember we
were I mean I was like trying to like
what is the benefit of it being that hot
though is there any benefit to that over
180 well I mean I think that you could
just stay in for us so the so the thing
so the thing is is that like with most
of the the studies that have been done
looking at the benefits on
cardiovascular health and all you know
I'll cause mortality quite a bit lower
like 20 minutes at 174 degrees but you
know if you're if you're if you're at
you can't stay in there for 25 minutes
or 20 minutes no I mean I guess
eventually knowing we were in there I
was in there for I don't know how long
and then I'd go in the ice back and then
go back in there but I would get out and
I would collapse you were actually in
there for 20 minutes
oh yeah a 210 degrees and I would get
out and I would go out to the mats out
there and just call laps yeah that
sounds like too much if too much do you
do you do like electrolyte replenishment
like yeah yeah yeah take liquid IV
actually oh yeah it liquid IVs a great
electrolyte supplement I take you know
what I found what works
popcorn popcorn why I'm just getting the
sodium it's like my Chi I like love I
love like boy I wear a continuous
glucose monitor that thing will go to
like 165 like just from like you know
just from the corn just from the popcorn
no like and I'm typically like you know
I'm typically like my meals that are
like you know low-carb you like I
usually like I eat more like a paleo ish
diet you know so it's like meat and
vegetables like you know I don't my
meals don't get me over a hundred for
sure
no it's the time popcorn so I'm doing
like popcorn yeah popcorn will spike it
really bad certain things will spike it
worse than others but but that that
popcorn sure it sure tastes good with
the sodium salt it's so good with salt
and butter ah man so delicious I don't
figure doubt that's the perfect food for
for movies we can only eat it in our
office though because we have a two and
a half year old and it's like a big joke
it's like the number one choking popcorn
is like the number one choking oh yeah
how'd you write the kernel I think yeah
yeah I choked on it sometimes yeah um
the the thing about the sauna at 210
degrees - one of the things that was
happening to me I was getting headaches
and my throat was burning like the next
I was coughing a lot like at like and I
was like I think I'm fucking up the
actual tissue in my throat oh man cuz
when you cook a brisket like you cook a
brisket of like 210 that's not true 20
the headaches I think is a sign that
you've pushed it too hard yeah I was
doing all yeah that's intense 20 minutes
into a 210
got addicted to it I got I get addicted
sometimes to things that are really hard
to do mm-hmm like just like so in my
mind I'm like because it's so hard to
stay in there for 20 minutes at 210
degrees I mean it hurts everything hurts
your skin hurts your toes hurt like it
hurts and then so then the next day I
would like to look forward to doing it
to see if I could do it easier again and
then I'm like in this weird loop that my
own brain creates which is really bad
that I'm very addicted to trying to
conquer things yeah I'm a bit that way
yeah so that was the thing and then but
then I took a step back I was like I
think I'm fucking myself up here 180 180
is great I like 180 Fahrenheit for sure
yeah have I have I told you my xylitol
story I wanted to tell you this so I was
you chew gum I know you do I remember
like after show like you chew gum right
sure
do you use xylitol gum tell you my story
so that all is it's like it's from the
birch plant we were just talking about
it's the natural it's naturally found in
plants so it's that birch you know what
they're whipping it's from that plant it
yes it is used as a like if you're
eating it you know I think it could
cause like like the way that all kind of
thing effect where it's like too much GI
distress but when you're chewing gum or
using toothpaste these many studies have
shown that it kills anaerobic bacteria
like streptococcus Octus mutants that
cause cavities and dental decay really
so so here's my story like multiple
studies in humans showing this it's like
a big deal so I went this is before I
was before I had my son I went to the
dentist my dentist is really great and
he did an x-ray we're doing a cleaning
you know dental hygiene thing and and he
comes back and he's like you've got two
cavities cavities I don't need sugar
like you know I've just I've got like a
bad oral microbiome or something that
I've just for four years or I don't know
I shouldn't have cavities because I
don't need sugar but anyways I had so
because you have two cavities they're at
the point of no return
where you know like you there I guess
they penetrate the enamel a certain
amount and they're like you have to you
have
like get them out and so the way I am is
I always like to like look into
everything before I do anything it's
like okay this is not my field I
understand I told him I'm like I'm gonna
do some reading research and see if I
can find you know if there's any you
know possibility that don't have to like
get a filling right and he's like okay
well if you find anything please send it
my way so so then I found out it was
pregnant
and I was so I was like okay well I
can't go back to dentist and at that
point I I was like looking through
everything while my totally trees and
everything like what do I have to get
rid of what's in there that could be
harmful and so I was like fluoride like
in my toothpaste so I was like I don't
want to use fluoride toothpaste anymore
and these stories are going to connect
but so fluoride fluoride has been shown
a lot of people are worried about the
effects on the brain and the only solid
evidence I could find on negative
effects of fluoride on the brain are in
utero meaning pregnant women and you
know and the effects on babies and I
don't know if toothpaste has enough to
even do anything but in my mind I was
like no getting rid of the fluoride you
know I got a I got a water filter that
got rid of the fluoride in the water and
I was like doing all that so I came
across this xylitol toothpaste is highly
talked to the base so I started doing
research on xylitol while I was looking
for alternatives so I was like tom's of
Maine I can't use that crap I've tried
it before it's like makes your ass smell
worse anyway so so I was like I've got
to find something other than Thompson
Maine so I came across societal stuffs
and I started doing research and then I
found all these studies I'm not only did
I find studies that like it you know
basically kills these bacteria that
cause cavities that s mutants pregnant
women that choose I'll eat all gum by
the way the studies were with gum not
the truth base that people were chewing
this gum and pregnant pregnant women
like they were like six months pregnant
starting start at six months and they
chewed this xylitol gum all the way up
until anywhere between the child you
know the baby being six months and there
were some studies that went out like a
year and then they met the the the
researchers measured the oral bacteria
of the toddlers and then they measured
in multiple years out as they'd be
children and the mothers chewing it
chewing the gum it lowered the incidence
of the nest Newton's in the children
because you know mothers kiss their kids
and you transfer and oral bacteria and
so they're like they're chewing the
xylitol gum had a positive effect on the
child's oral microbiome and I was like
yeah I'm gonna do this I was like I gave
myself
TMJ like I chewed so much xylitol gum
while I was pregnant I'm like I still
like to this day I chew I have something
with me right now but TMJ is like my job
was I was eating a lot of sauteed kale
and chewing a lot of xylitol gum when I
was pregnant
and so but it totally fixed itself
thankfully so anyways a year goes by I
have I have my son I benched him like
okay I gotta go back to dentist because
you know pregnancy makes your teeth
worse there's like all this stuff about
you bleeding your gums bleed there's
like there's some kind of term we're
like women get like like what's that
periodontitis or gingivitis one of those
two it's bad anyways so I go back to
Dennis we do the x-rays and I'm like oh
you're gonna tell me about the stupid
cavities and I haven't done the research
you know and it goes he comes in and he
goes I've never seen this before but
your cavities are gone he shows the
x-rays and he shows me before and after
he's like they're totally gone and and I
was like that's amazing as like is it
the pregnancy's did he's like no he's
like we get women coming in your after
pain is like worse and I said the only
thing that I did like I could think of
is like my obsessive xylitol gum chewing
which I still do and the fact that it
does decrease that you know I don't know
how it would affect an already formed
cavity but my cavities are gone
Wow so my doctor my I see that my
dentist is great because he like you
know any dentist could just be like nope
they're still there like I don't know
what the x-ray supposed to look like you
know so so I feel like he's a
trustworthy guy I worry about shifty
Dennis right Yeah right right
so that is crazy so the xylitol gums
somehow knee so you think that what it
did was affect your the microbiome
morale oh and it's showed there's also
studies showing that it decreases the
incidence of I said I'm talking about
Staphylococcus mutants because it's the
only one I remember but there's another
one that causes dental decay but it
didn't affect any of the good bacteria
in the mouth well so so I was like now
I'm just like it's all staff a caucus
mutant that that's the same is that the
same family that you get from staph
infections
no no different stuff yeah okay but I
mean there's lots of different
Staphylococcus blah blah blah blah you
know okay so this islet old gum Joe you
need to get on it it's really awesome
like it's I really think it's we already
are that gum we've been chewing a
xylitol in it oh the neural gum oh okay
I've been chewing this neuro gum that is
it's a gum with nootropics in it
nootropics yes like plank so I was like
I was like eating a bunch of ECGs you
see GC and coke of cocoa via like
capsules like the the catechins in the
dark chocolate for mine what's in it
Alfie I mean I see I was looking for my
opportunity but I was out because that
like helps call me it's got a little bit
of caffeine l-theanine and B vitamins I
fucking love it I love it but I take it
before I do kickboxing workouts I chew
chew gum I used to mints - I used to um
no sorry it was neuro
yes b6 and b12 also um that looks
interesting I used to take when I was
like doing long-distance running
I was running like you know eight to ten
miles a day and I was doing that like I
was probably about 50 50 miles a week
which is pretty good you know this is
like when I was in the early 20s but I
would like dose up on all these like B
complex vitamins and I swear I would
just have endurance just know for sure
I don't know if it was like placebo or
not but like b12 is a big impact on your
ability to do work you think so oh yeah
for sure I haven't done any research on
it but I just know that I used to take
them and I felt like a big effect I
don't know yeah b12 shots you ever get a
b12 shot I did so that I the intravenous
vitamin C I got I think I had b12 in it
around b12 shots give you an awesome
little boost yeah
but I haven't done like a specific b12
shot this stuff's pretty good and I
don't feel anything like just talking to
you heart I don't feel anything weird oh
no isn't that is anybody supposed to
like also be like the calming yeah it
relieves anxiety yeah yeah you just got
to get a good CBD like a good CBD that
doesn't have THC because I have a few
that I've tried from other kind the mmm
that Tang show that I take is from CBD
MD and it doesn't get me high at all but
I've had some from other companies where
I'd have like three drops falling like
oh does it help your sleep
yes or does the tea or do you require to
use different know different people have
different results when it comes to CBD
and some people find that CBD with THC
benefits them more and some people find
that it's just the CBD itself but CBD MD
the company that I use what I really
like is they have a bunch of muscle
creams and like you know stuff that you
rub on the outside of sore muscles that
stuff's fantastic it's really good
penetrates into the skin and just really
good at alleviating soreness and I had a
so like one of my old colleagues science
colleagues was telling me that like they
were measuring some samples from like
different CBD products and like the
majority of them didn't actually even
have much CBD in them at all like
there's just a lot of I mean I mean this
has been shown with vitamin vitamin you
know vitamin supplements as well there's
been so many studies showing like even
vitamin D supplements like it'll say it
has 10,000 IU but it only has like 6,000
like there's been sampling where you
like you go to like Walgreens or CVS or
you know you're just whatever random
place and grab the vitamin that they
don't have as the concentration innocent
high also those like echinacea things
like a lot of it just clover leaf clover
like because it it's not regulated I
mean animation kind of bullshit anyway
like what does that do for you you know
supposed to jack up your immune system
that's it everybody always told me that
they were all sick all the time
yeah no I know I haven't looked into the
echinacea someone like someone asked me
about the elderberry so I looked into
that and because I was like is that like
an echinacea thing but there is some
actual legitimate research elderberry
like has been shown in randomized
controlled trials to like effect no the
immune system and lower cold duration
and stuff like that you know so are you
a fan of kombucha do you I
I am a fan of kombucha I used to drink
what is the one I drink the dark one
ginger lemon darn I can't remember the
name teas no I used to but then there
they are sugar that the sugar and that
one's too much so the one that I drink
is 2 grams per serving and there's two
servings so there's only 4 grams of
sugar the sugar though is what helps the
fermentation and helps the fungus grow
right I think this is the gt1 that had
like 8 grams so it was like twice as
much and the other and the ginger lemon
one I like the ginger lemon a lot and
I'm like this one tastes better
so the ginger lemon does yeah the one
that I'm getting it's like it's found at
like Whole Foods and sprouts and it's an
amount of active culture though like
that's the question I don't know yeah
it's in the dark bottle you once told me
dark bottles better well the dark
bottles better in job because it doesn't
ferment in the Sun as well doesn't the
Sun doesn't penetrate it okay almost
like a UV protector gut gut microbiome
health is important for a new function
it really is like like that's another
thing we're kimchi do you
so I what's the brain I get I buy it buy
it from sprouts or Whole Foods
mother-in-law mother-in-law's that's
what I get we have some here yeah yeah I
love that fan it's so delicious too I
love it with meat meat yeah we've we've
been like we have a bunch of elk burger
we we ordered online order I no no no no
I'll give you some we have slapped you
up we were like you early on we were
just like we bought freezers I need the
elk burger I need all the organs just so
thankful that it's not as bad right I
really am
yeah I'm shameful as well but I think
our government needs to make an
adjustment then they need to recognize
that it's not as bad and start opening
things up but there's so many people
that are just the sky's following the
skies falling still they're still saying
it there
still screaming from the rooftops like
we cantle people are dying and like
people are dying every day from
everything that testing I think that's
gonna make you a big difference and I
think people become less scared as these
as these therapeutics do emerge which
which which they will I'm sure
absolutely but what I really wanted to
talk to you the reason why I wanted to
bring you in here is this conversation
that we just had to talk about one of
the one of the methods you can use to
help boost your immune system keep your
body healthy I think we kind of got it
dialed in so vitamin D seems to be very
critical sauna if you have it if you
don't bath vitamin C orally you need a
big dose and it's still not gonna have
the same effect if you can do IV you
don't need to do it but once a week
anything else
zinc let's quercetin for your course at
work and then sleep sleep giant and
microbiome health do you use anything to
help you sleep in terms of like a
meditation app or do you so I use
melatonin okay I used to not so I have a
history of night terrors and it was well
it's like when I when I'm stressed out
particularly it flares up and it happens
like when I'm I think when I'm shifting
from one sleep stage to the next where I
am asleep but somehow I wake up but I'm
not awake and I can still but I'm moving
my body and I think that someone's in
the room and that they're gonna come get
me and I freaked out and I scream and
it's happened where I scared and of
course she's like in the middle of the
sleep and it happens earlier in my sleep
cycle so it's like but um I've so I
started doing I started reading about
this stuff and like I don't want it like
the treatments were like benzos I'm like
hell no I'm not gonna take benzos that's
you know they've been shown to like
cause dementia right yeah so that's
terrible
yes it's very addictive and then like if
you if you come addicted to it I mean it
can like you can like go through serious
like you die well Jordan Peterson just
went through all this and literally I
went out yes and went to
Russia to have some sort of crazy
medical detox awful he's still suffering
from it
he's been fucked up really bad Wow
that sucks yeah so I didn't want to do
that but there was there was hot some
studies showing that high dose melatonin
you know more in the lake 10 milligram
range sorry I'm taking 9 milligrams a
night and I totally stopped having for
the most part
dances yeah like I went through one
episode where what happens when someone
has a night terror is like if someone
else in the sharing the bed with you
like tries to stop you or help like
because I'm still asleep I'm not aware
that that's my husband doing that and I
really think someone's trying to get me
and so I just go into like crazy mode
and I like I like somehow like crawled
from our bedroom all the way out to the
living room and by the time I woke up I
mean I had bruised myself I was like how
would I get out here you know like this
was like the worst this was the worst
that's ever happened to me so usually I
just kind of scream and wake up and like
I'm like like I think someone's gonna
get me you know melatonin totally
totally stopped it totally stops it I
measure I track my sleep as well and and
I think that you know I don't know the
sleep stage stuff how accurate that is I
think it's not very accurate but
duration is pretty accurate so so what
do you not think is accurate like tell
me like how much time I'm in deep sleep
our or ring oh I don't think that's
accurate
I think that the I don't think the sleep
stage is accurate was that because like
that's like you have to like measure
brain wave like it's measuring it's me
I'll tell you why because I've had
multiple incidents when I was nursing my
son back when I was nursing my son where
he was on a nursing pillow and I'm very
relaxed of course I'm nursing him right
making oxytocin and and I'm like
scrolling on my phone reading and it
calculated me as being in REM sleep and
it happened it happened more than once
there's other times so Dan and I don't
we don't have a TV in our room bedroom
but when we go travel we're in a hotel
were in bed so we're laying in bed
watching a show and I'm like totally
relaxed in bed and it's totally putting
me as calculating as asleep so I'm like
you know
you know it calculates heart rate and
movement mmm and body temperature so you
know I I like it I do I just I don't
think that it's totally accurate my only
real way to measure that is those little
suction cup things they put on your head
Yeah right I did a sleep study once cuz
I've sleep apnea so do ya do that do you
do a CPAP er no I have I got a
mouthpiece it's amazing yeah it's a
mouthpiece tell me what it is because my
father-in-law has apnea and then there's
a doctor doctor Keroppi and he's a very
wacky guy Europian yeah am I supposed to
write that down is that gonna it fella
come up yeah you could find it Brian
Kuro pian in these in Tarzana yeah
pretty sure he's in Tarzana oh he used
to be out here well he was in Tarzana
and then I think you might have moved to
Sherman Oaks
anyway you'll find it I'll find it I'll
find it I'll send it to you
but anyway he devised a mouthpiece it
has like a little tongue depressor and
for me my problem is my neck is very
thick there it is what is a yeah full
breath solution CPAP alternative calm
yeah it's um the ideas a lot of people
have a problem with CPAP s-- they it's
uncomfortable
you were in a mask over your face that's
how I felt and so this mouthpiece of
sleep apnea mouthpiece it sits in my
mouth and the tongue depressor keeps my
tongue from sliding back and closing my
airway Wow
did you go in so I I was okay you did
going in I had a sleep study done Wow it
was bad it's hard to sleep probably when
you're in this right like you're it is
but I did sleep you know because I was I
was sleep-deprived that's what it looks
like so see it's it's in and that little
tongue thing pushes down on your your
actual tongue it's like look does it
have to get fit like mmm yeah yeah you
go in there and they mold yeah exactly
yeah it makes a big difference Wow
places and forgot it in a panic what
fuck yeah I mean like nothing ever yeah
mm-hmm so that's a that's a huge thing
it's not that at first because I was
like am I just like freaking out
because I'm like not getting enough
oxygen or something you know but I'd had
me do a pulse oximeter thing
wrestlers and athletes football players
get it because your neck muscles get
really big and when your neck muscles
get big if you have a big tongue and I
have a big tongue when I lay down it
closes the airway so my tongue slides oh
no we just associate with obesity yes
yes well they get fat yeah that's right
that's one of the ways that they there's
operations that they do to try to
alleviate it and they just cut out some
of the tissue inside your mouth and then
they also cut out your don't worry cuz I
wouldn't be able to talk for like a
month right if you don't wear it do you
snore Oh like crazy but when you wear it
you don't snore I don't snore at all
yeah your wife must love it she loves it
yeah before I was off and I also choked
I can't breathe you know because I my
body's forcing to adjust I remember I
was on a plane once and there was this
guy behind me and he was kind of a heavy
fellow and he was he was really snoring
loud who's laying on his back and really
snoring loud and then he would go
without breathing for multiple seconds
and I filmed him and I I told him when
he woke up I go hey man I go do you know
you have sleep apnea and he's like no I
go listen I have it too I go but you got
to do something about it I go you hold
your breath for long periods of time
because really all imma show you yeah so
I showed him he's like fuck and I go
yeah dude this is really bad it's
associated with so many different things
it's associated with high blood pressure
heart attacks the risk of all sorts of
ailments plus you're just not sleeping
enough you're not getting real sleep
because you're constantly being woken up
and shocked into this state of like no
it's really bad it's bad for you and
it's bad for your spouse like my
mother-in-law has to go she goes into
the guest room to sleep like after they
go to bed because she can't sleep like
it's really bad do you have to do this
to get the I wanted to kill that guy you
have no idea what having someone that
snores is like you can't
no I can't wear my ears or like ear
plugs first of all they're not
comfortable for me I have really tiny
ear canals and I just like cancel some
people can sleep with earplugs like I
just can't it's uncomfortable yeah
snoring is a real issue and it's usually
an issue of you know some sort of an
impeded airway yeah yeah I'm glad I
don't have that but the night terror
thing I'm just the melatonin is helped
so yeah for sleeping yeah oh I mean I
think that that going so basically like
having a good circadian rhythm and and
like bright light exposure in the early
morning like it really does help like
there was a time when I would you know
like I lived in in Oakland I was just in
this dark little apartment and you know
like it just it wasn't really great for
my circadian rhythm cuz I would wake up
in the morning especially like on
weekends and stuff like you know there's
like no light coming in and I didn't I
wasn't I didn't live in a place that was
like I could just go outside and frolic
[Laughter]
but yeah bright light exposure big to
big it was like a huge thing and the red
light so I have I do the Phillips you
where at like 5 o'clock all the lights
in our house go red that makes a huge
impact on my son and his sleep cycle
like because children are really
sensitive to light because they don't
have like cataracts and stuff and so the
melody there they're like you know that
melatonin is not being produced so like
if we go travel or go to my in-laws or
something they have the lights on I'm
like going around the house or any mall
off because I want my son to go to bed I
don't know how you watch do you if
you're looking at your screens these
blue light blocking glasses so I have
like all the apps and stuff and most of
the time like and I turn my iPhone
screen is like down and they have the
black background and all that but no I
don't wear glasses I just yeah those are
great you should look into the blue
light because when I actually get a
chance to watch TV like it doesn't
happen much because right now my son
falls asleep at like 9:00 and he wakes
up at 6:00 and so like Jesus so I'm like
when do like when can I cut the nap out
like I'm googling everything you know
just trying to figure it all out it's
like you know you have to keep happening
until they're three I don't know I gotta
like do some more reading because like
it's not that's not uniform I know my
youngest didn't never want to take naps
she's like fuck off staying awake oh my
son doesn't want to take he doesn't want
to sleep ever he wants to party all day
every day man
he's like it'll start to because he
starts to like get a dusk and he's like
it's still daytime I'm like for a little
bit it's gonna be nighttime soon what
about if you get him active he exercises
yeah well it's we used to go to soccer
class and stuff and go to the park but
it's hard with the shelter in place
right now so we've been doing like yeah
so I've been trying to like take them
you know and like we do like hide and
seek and run run run and wear him out
but you know I think I think the bright
light exposure for him you know taking
him out in the morning is really
important and now that like cuz we you
know now I'm able to do that more like I
feel safer you know like so especially
being outside I don't not as concerned
so like I think that's really important
from bright light exposure is just it
there's just study after study showing
it sets your circadian clock boom it's
like okay this isn't this is this is
like the morning and your circadian
clock starts and then you know so you
become sleepy when you're supposed to
come become sleepy as long as you're not
in tons of you know bright light at
night um but that's been probably the
biggest thing by the way you know what's
actually I was talking about my glucose
monitor my continuous glucose monitor
we're talking about popcorn you know the
biggest thing that really affected my
glucose levels wasn't popcorn it was
actually lack of sleep really yeah
big-time affect like particularly if I
wasn't exercising like like almost
pre-diabetic level fasting blood glucose
like when this is this is when my sleep
was being disrupted when like my son was
like younger so I've been wearing my
continuous glucose monitor for a year
and a half maybe two years how do you
wear this what is it mind I'll mines
right here oh you have a little patch
that you wear on your all time yeah
you're not diabetic no now I've seen a
guy who wears one of those but he
diabetic yeah I mean I I'm wearing it
because I'm sort of trying to understand
how different foods have different
lifestyle changes like how long you been
wearing I got it probably right after
the last time I was on here okay right
literally yeah just constant wear for
years then I've been where yeah it's
been over it's been almost maybe two
years I'm almost two years a year and a
half but um I most the time constantly
wear it sometimes because it only it's
like the sensor lasts for ten days and
have to change it and sometimes I like
forget it and a couple days go by and
then I start like eating the pomegranate
because my son loves and I'm like I
wonder what this is doing but the lack
of sleep because he would wake up like I
would be getting interrupted multiple
times at night like you know where it
was like I don't know he was going
through some developmental stage and and
he would stand in his crib and it's like
so I was I was getting woken up multiple
times at night for like prolonged
periods very very like fragmented sleep
and I was nothing had changed with my
diet and my blood glucose my fasting
blood glucose levels if I'm might
exercise routines dialed in I'm not like
shelter-in-place you know it's you know
mid 80s and so I was up like I was up to
like my fasting blood glucose would get
up sometimes to like if I wouldn't
exercise like one I might wake up in the
morning and I'm like 106 107 108 and it
was horrible why is the lack of sleep
cause there's so many studies published
we did a video on it and like it's I
mean it affects like the the insulin
secretion sensitivity like all that
stuff it's all being affected so it's
one of the reasons why like you know
shift shift workers they're like a
really are prone to type 2 diabetes they
really are so sleep is so important that
those poor people tell it's gotta be one
of the worst things for your body
nurses like their doctors that anybody
the first responders workers anybody's
working that late shift Dan Dan had his
appendix removed like he so he had was
this crazy story but you probably have
to go crazy is it well it's pretty crazy
actually so he had this appendix thing
happened we were visiting his parents in
Memphis and it was like Christmas Eve
and so he had to go to hospital he's
like it's bad I need to go Hospital so
we went to the hospital
they're like yeah you have appendicitis
but he didn't feel comfortable getting
it removed there cuz there was just a
bunch of factors the doctor wasn't this
doctor like you know all that stuff so
um he got this antibiotic treatment
there like sent him home a couple days
later he got some IV treatment and then
it came back like a couple months later
or like a few months later back when we
were home but he was like all of a
sudden like the first time he had it he
was just like paying I should go
something's wrong the second time he was
like vomiting and like you know you know
I didn't want to like I had my son was
sleeping it was like 2:00 in the morning
he woke me up so you know we called the
first I called the ambulance I was just
like you know he's vomiting I don't know
if it's a ruptured you know because it
could be serious right but anyways these
first the whole point was the first
responders they came and they were just
like yeah we don't ever sleep like it's
like we don't ever sleep it's just so
awful for them terrible for you so
anybody's working the late shift god
it's gonna be so bad for you I used to
deliver newspapers so every morning I
was up at five o'clock in the morning
and I was also doing comedy so I was
going to bed really late at night and I
was just always tired I just I would
just I would be sitting here I'll just
fall asleep
that's awful yeah it was terrible a lot
of a lot of people are sleep deprived
deprived so a lot yeah a lot yeah it's a
huge factor yeah well I think we covered
a lot today we got we got a lot in the
vitamin D information was so fascinating
all of it I appreciate you very much
you're always an awesome resource I
really ain't you're awesome and talk to
thanks so much for having me back on
impact my pleasure
anytime tell people how to find you it's
found my fitness my fitness I had
everything I have an iTunes podcast as
well as all my fitness yeah YouTube
channel found my fitness and a website
found my fitness and found my fitness
Instagram Fitness Twitter that's right
all right thank you Ron I appreciate you
bye everybody
[Music]